
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Group Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include group theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

\begin{definition}
**(solvable group)**\linebreak
A [[group]] is __solvable__ if it is a [[finite number|finite]] iterated [[group extension]] of an [[abelian group]] by [[abelian groups]]. 

In other words, a group $G$ is solvable if and only if there exists a finite sequence 

$$
  \{ 1\}
    \;\subset\;
  G_1 
    \;\subset\;
  G_2 
    \;\subset\;
  \ldots 
    \;\subset\;
  G_k 
   \;=\; 
  G 
  \,,
$$

in which 

1. $G_{j-1}$ is [[normal subgroup|normal]] in $G_j$ 

1. the [[quotient groups]] $G_j/G_{j-1}$ are [[abelian group|abelian]].

\end{definition}

Solvability can equivalently be expressed in terms of breaking a group down rather than building it up.
\begin{definition}
**(solvable group)**\linebreak
Given elements $g,h$ of a group $G$, the [[group commutator|commutator]] is $[g,h] := g^{-1} h^{-1} g h$. The [[commutator subgroup]] of $G$ is the subgroup of $G$ generated by the commutators $[g,h]$ for all $g, h \in G$. A group is solvable if the series of groups produced by repeatedly taking the commutator subgroup, the [[derived series]], terminates with the [[trivial group]] after finitely many steps.
\end{definition}


Similar to nilpotent groups, solvable groups have an inductive definition via group extensions.


The class of **solvable groups** is defined inductively by the following clauses:

1. All abelian groups are solvable.

2. If $1\to G' \to G \to G''\to 1$ is a group extension and both $G'$ and $G''$ are solvable, then $G$ is solvable.

## Examples

\begin{example}
\label{GaloisGroups}
**([[Galois groups]])**\linebreak
The terminology "solvable groups" comes from elementary [[Galois theory]]: every [[polynomial]] [[equation]] $\phi$ over an [[integral domain]] $K$ has a corresponding [[Galois group]] $Gal(\phi/K)$, and $Gal(\phi/K)$ is a solvable group if and only if $\phi$ is a [[solvable polynomial equation|solvable equation]] (meaning that all its solutions in an [[algebraic closure]] of $K$ are expressible using the elements of $K$, the field operations, and extraction of roots).
\end{example}

\begin{remark}
Informally, Ex. \ref{GaloisGroups}
may be thought of as each step in the derived series of the Galois group requiring an additional level of nesting of radicals. If the derived series does not terminate, then the solutions of the polynomial equation cannot be expressed by radicals, no matter how deeply nested.
\end{remark}

\begin{example}\label{NilpotentGroups}
**([[nilpotent groups]])**
A [[nilpotent group]] is a solvable group given by *[[central extensions|central]]* [[group extensions]].
\end{example}

\begin{example}
**([[Taketa's theorem]])**
\linebreak
[[M-groups]] are [[solvable group|solvable]].
\end{example}
([Taketa 1930](Taketa's+theorem#Taketa30), [Isaacs 1976, thm. 5.12](Taketa's+theorem#Isaacs76))

Similarly:

\begin{example}
 If *some multiple* of any [[complex numbers|complex]] [[irrep]] of a [[finite group]] is [[induced representation|induced]] form an [[irrep]] of a proper [[subgroup]], then the group is [[solvable group|solvable]].
\end{example}
([LMT 2013](Taketa's+theorem#LMT13))


## Related concepts

* [[commutator subgroup]]
* [[nilpotent group]]

## References

Textbooks:

* [[Cornelia Druţu]], [[Michael Kapovich]], Chapter 13 of: *Geometric group theory*, Colloquium Publications **63**, AMS 2018 ([ISBN:978-1-4704-1104-6](https://bookstore.ams.org/coll-63/), [pdf](https://courses.maths.ox.ac.uk/node/view_material/35649))
* Ian Stewart, *Galois Theory*, fourth edition. CRC Press, 2015. ISBN:978-1-4822-4582-0. Chapter 14.

Articles:

* L. Goldmakher, "Arnold's elementary proof of the insolubility of the quintic". [pdf](https://web.williams.edu/Mathematics/lg5/394/ArnoldQuintic.pdf)

See also:

* [[eom]]: [solvable group](http://eom.springer.de/s/s086130.htm), [Lie group, solvable](http://eom.springer.de/l/l058690.htm)

* Wikipedia, *[Solvable group](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solvable_group)*


[[!redirects solvable group]]
[[!redirects solvable groups]]
[[!redirects solvable subgroup]]
[[!redirects solvable subgroups]]


[[!redirects soluble group]]
[[!redirects soluble groups]]
[[!redirects soluble subgroup]]
[[!redirects soluble subgroups]]