[[!redirects PAT]]
[[!redirects PAT analogy]]
[[!redirects propositions as types analogy]]
[[!redirects CHI]]
[[!redirects Curry--Howard]]
[[!redirects Curry--Howard isomorphism]]

# Idea #

__Triadic Analogy__

Sometimes I think of it this way:

$$\array{
\arrayopts{\frame{solid}}
Proof Hint & : & Proof & : & Proposition
\\
&& :: &&
\\
Untyped Term & : & Typed Term & : & Type
}$$

Sometimes I think of it this way:

$$\array{
\arrayopts{\frame{solid}}
Proposition & : & Type
\\
& :: &
\\
Proof & : & Typed Term
\\
& :: &
\\
Proof Hint & : & Untyped Term
}$$

What follows may be a slightly different way of looking at the _propositions as types analogy_ than people are used to, so if it's necessary to adjust the title after a while, that's okay, but this name will do for the time being.

In formal work with the calculi of categories, combinators, and related systems, there is some advantage to performing applications and compositions on the right.  In more casual work one naturally reverts to applications and compositions on the left, creating a call for ways to maintain cross-cultural dialogue between the two conventions.

Since we are dealing with non-associative calculi (where "non" = n.o.n. = not of necessity), it is necessary to use parentheses for every application and composition or else to establish determinate conventions for leaving the intended associations tacit.

Assuming that application and composition follow the same convention, we have the following four conventions for the application and association of terms:

* LALA = left application, left association.
* LARA = left application, right association.
* RALA = right application, left association.
* RARA = right application, right association.

There are several ways to mark the convention that governs a given context of discussion, either by using different operation symbols for the different styles of application and composition or else by naming the convention in force by means of indices equivalent to the above descriptors.

# Identity, or the Identifier #

## Step 1 ##

Consider the following problem requirements:

One is given a syntactic specification of the following form:

$$\array{x & = & x\mathop{I}}$$

This amounts to a _paraphrastic definition_ of the operator $\mathop{I}$, where the syntactic frame "$x = x \underline{\phantom{I}}$" is the defining context, or _definiens_, and $\mathop{I}$ is the object to be defined, or _definiendum_.

One is now asked to find a _pure interpretant_ for $\mathop{I}$, that is, an equivalent term in $\langle \mathop{K}, \mathop{S} \rangle$, the _combinatory algebra_ generated by $\mathop{K}$ and $\mathop{S}$, that does as $\mathop{I}$ does.
