+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Linguistics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include linguistics - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Formal grammars are sets of rules which describe which strings of words are considered grammatical. They can be used to characterize the syntax of both [[linguistics|natural language]] and [[programming language|programming languages]].

## Unrestricted grammar {#unrestrictedgrammar}

Fix a finite set $V$ called the vocabulary, also called the _terminal symbols_. A _language_ is a subset of the free [[monoid]] $V^*$, i.e. strings of words. Let $V^+$ denote the free [[semigroup]], i.e. non-empty strings. $X + Y$ and $X \times Y$ denote the disjoint union and the Cartesian product respectively.

An _unrestricted grammar_ is given by a tuple $G = (V, X, R, s)$ where $X$ is a finite set of _nonterminal symbols_ with a _start symbol_ $s \in X$ and $R \subseteq (V + X)^+ \times (V + X)^*$ is finite a set of _rewrite rules_. The language $L(G)$ generated by the grammar is usually defined as follows:

1. Define the "rewrite step" relation $(\to_R) \subseteq (V + X)^* \times (V + X)^*$ where $(\alpha \beta \gamma) \to_R (\alpha \delta \gamma)$ for all $(\beta, \delta) \in R$ and $\alpha, \gamma \in (V + X)^*$.
2. Take its reflexive transitive closure $(\to_R^*)$, i.e. $s \to_R^* t$ iff there is some sequence of rewrite steps $s \to_R s_1 \to_R s_2 \to_R ... \to_R t$. This sequence is called a _grammatical derivation_.
3. Let $L(G) = \{ w_1 ... w_n \in V^* | s \to_R^* w_1 ... w_n\}$ for $s \in X$ the start symbol.

The construction of $\to_R^*$ can be seen as the free [[preorder|preordered]] [[monoid]] generated by the rewrite rules $R$. Grammatical derivations can be seen as [[string diagram|string diagrams]] in the free [[monoidal category]] with the symbols $V + X$ as generating objects and the rewrite rules $R$ as generating arrows.

## Other frameworks

[[context free grammar|Context free grammars]] are defined in the same way as unrestricted grammars, but they only allow rules with a single non-terminal symbol as domain. In that particular case, the grammatical derivations are [[tree|trees]] with the start symbol as root and the words as leaves.

In [[categorial grammar|categorial grammars]], monoidal categories are replaced by [[biclosed monoidal category]]. The derivations are trees with two kinds of rules: 1) a finite language-dependent _dictionary_ of rules $w \to t$ with $w \in V$ and $t \in F(X)$, for $F(X)$ the free residuated monoid (see [Lambek (1958)](#Lambek58)) and 2) an infinite number of language-agnostic rules, for the application of each [[higher order logic|higher order type]].

Similarly, [[pregroup grammar|pregroup grammars]] are constructed from a dictionary with types coming from a free pregroup $P(X)$. The rewrite rules are the counit maps $x^* \otimes x \to 1$ and $x \otimes {}^*x \to 1$, canceling a non-terminal symbol $x \in P(X)$ with its left and right adjoints $x^*$ and ${}^*x$. The derivations are planar [[string diagrams]] in a [[rigid monoidal category]], the counit maps are drawn as cup-shaped wires connecting the words in a sentence.

## History

The origins of grammar go back to 4th century BC India: the Sanskrit philologist Pānini showed ancient mastery of [[context-sensitive grammar|context-sensitive grammars]] to analyse the syntax of Sanskrit.

Unrestricted grammars were introduced by [[Noam Chomsky]] as the level zero of his [[Chomsky hierarchy|hierarchy]], they are equivalent to [[Turing machine|Turing machines]] in expressive power.

The similar concept of _semi-Thue system_, also known as a string [[rewriting]] system, was introduced thirty years before Chomsky's work on grammar, see [Thue (1914)](#Thue14). It makes no distinction between terminal and non-terminal symbols, and allows rules with empty left-hand sides.

A third, equivalent, formulation was proved to be [[decidability|undecidable]] independently by [[Emil Post]] and [[Andrey Markov]]: the word problem for [[semigroup|semigroups]].

## References

* Saroja Bhate and Subhash Kak. Pānini’s Grammar and Computer Science. Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (1993)
* {#Thue14} Axel Thue. Probleme Uber Veränderungen von Zeichenreihen Nach Gegebenen Regeln. (1914)
* Emil L. Post. Recursive Unsolvability of a problem of Thue. Journal of Symbolic Logic (1947)
* A Markov. On certain insoluble problems concerning matrices. In Doklady Akad (1947)
* {#Lambek58} J. Lambek. The mathematics of sentence structure. American Mathematics Monthly (1958)
* J. Lambek. Type grammar revisited. Logical Aspects of Computational Linguistics (1999)

