Given an internal [[groupoid]] in the category $Aff_k$ of affine algebraic $k$-[[schemes]], where $k$ is a field, the $k$-algebras of [[global section]]s over the scheme of objects and scheme of morphisms have an additional structure of a commutative Hopf algebroid. In fact this is an [[dual equivalence|antiequivalence of categories]]. Commutative Hopf algebroids are useful also in a version in [[brave new algebra]] (the work of Rognes). 

There are several generalization to the noncommutative case. A difficult part is to work over the noncommutative base (i.e., the object of objects is noncommutative). The definition of a [[bialgebroid]] is not that difficult and there is even a very old definition due Takeuchi. To add an antipode is nontrivial. A definition of Lu from mid 1990s is rather nonselfdual unlike the case of [[Hopf algebras]]. So a better solution is to abandon the idea of an antipode and have some replacement for it. There are two approaches, one via [[monoidal bicategory|monoidal bicategories]] due to Day and Street, and another due Gabi B&#246;hm, using pairs of a left and right bialgebroid. Gabi has later shown that the two definitions are in fact equivalent.
 
* B. Day, R. Street, _Monoidal bicategories and Hopf algebroids_, Advances in Mathematics, 129, 1 (1997) 99--157 

* G. B&#246;hm, _An alternative notion of Hopf algebroid_; in "Hopf algebras in noncommutative geometry and physics",  31--53, Lecture Notes in Pure and Appl. Math., 239, Dekker, New York, 2005; <a href="http://arxiv.org/abs/math.QA/0301169"> math.QA/0301169 </a>
