pages/2/3/6/0/632/content.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A [[functor]] $F \colon C\to D$ is **conservative** if it is "isomorphism-[[reflected limit|reflecting]]", i.e. if $g:a\to b$ is a [[morphism]] in $C$ such that $F(g)$ is an [[isomorphism]] in $D$, then $g$ is an isomorphism in $C$.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

Sometimes conservative functors are assumed to be [[faithful functor|faithful]] as well.  If $C$ has, and $F$ preserves, [[equalizer]]s, then conservativity implies faithfulness.

=--

See [[conservative morphism]] for a generalization to an arbitrary [[2-category]].

## Examples


+-- {: .num_prop #PullbackAlongEpimorphisms}
###### Proposition

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[category]] with [[pullbacks]]. Given any [[morphism]] $f \colon X \longrightarrow Y$ in $\mathcal{C}$ write

$$
  f^\ast \colon \mathcal{C}_{/Y} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}_{/X}
$$

for the [[functor]] of pullback along $f$ between [[slice categories]] ([[base change]]). If [[strong epimorphisms]] in $\mathcal{C}$ are preserved by pullback, then the following are equivalent:

1. $f$ is a [[strong epimorphism]];

1. $f^\ast$ is conservative.

=--

(e.g. [Johnstone, lemma A.1.3.2](#Jonstone))


+-- {: .num_example #FullyFaithfulFunctorIsConservative}
###### Example

Every [[fully faithful functor]] is a conservative functor.
An example of a functor that is conservative but not fully faithful is the inclusion of the groupoid core of a category into the category.

=--

+-- {: .num_example #ConservativeFunctorsBetweenPretoposesAreInjectiveOnSubobjectLattices}
###### Example

When $C$ and $D$ are [[pretopos|pretoposes]], a pretopos morphism $F : C \to D$ is conservative if and only if for every object $c \in C$, the induced map between [[poset of subobjects | subobject lattices]] $F^{(c)} : \operatorname{Sub}(c) \to \operatorname{Sub}(F(c))$ is injective.

=--



## Properties

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

A conservative functor $F : C \to D$ [[reflected limit|reflects]] all [[limits]] and [[colimits]] that it [[preserved limit|preserves]] and which exist in the source category.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Let $K : J \to C$ be a [[diagram]] in $C$ whose limit $\lim K$ exists and such that $\lim F\circ K \simeq F \lim K$. Then if $const_c \to K$ is a [[cone]] in $C$ that is sent to a limiting cone $F const_c$ in $D$, then by the [[universal property]] of the limit in $D$ the morphism $F( c \to \lim K)$ is an isomorphism in $D$, hence must have been an isomorphism in $C$, hence $const_c$ must have been a limiting cone in $C$.

The arguments for colimits is analogous.
=--




## Related concepts

* [[conservative (∞,1)-functor]]

## Literature


* Geun Bin Im, [[Gregory Maxwell Kelly]], _Some remarks on conservative functors with left adjoints_,  J. Korean Math. Soc. __23__ (1986),  no. 1, 19&#8211;33, [MR87i:18002b](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=843247), [pdf](http://mathnet.kaist.ac.kr/mathnet/thesis_file/JKMS-23-1-19-33.pdf); _On classes of morphisms closed under limits_, J. Korean Math. Soc. __23__ (1986), no. 1, 1&#8211;18, _Adjoint-triangle theorems for conservative functors_, Bull. Austral. Math. Soc. __36__ (1987),  no. 1, 133&#8211;136, [MR88k:18005](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=897429), [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S000497270002637X) 

* {#Jonstone} [[Peter Johnstone]], _[[Sketches of an Elephant]]_


For an example of a conservative, but not faithful, functor $f: A\to Set$ having a left adjoint see Example 2.4 in

* Reinhard B&#246;rger, [[Walter Tholen]], _Strong regular and dense generators_, [[Cahiers]] de Topologie et G&#233;om&#233;trie Diff&#233;rentielle Cat&#233;goriques __32__, no. 3 (1991), p. 257-276, [MR1158111](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=1158111), [numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CTGDC_1991__32_3_257_0)

[[!redirects conservative functors]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 164790 Update date: 2021-05-26 20:48:27+00:00 Page name: conservative functor

pages/2/3/6/0/632/content.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A [[functor]] $F \colon C\to D$ is **conservative** if it is "isomorphism-[[reflected limit|reflecting]]", i.e. if $g:a\to b$ is a [[morphism]] in $C$ such that $F(g)$ is an [[isomorphism]] in $D$, then $g$ is an isomorphism in $C$.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

Sometimes conservative functors are assumed to be [[faithful functor|faithful]] as well.  If $C$ has, and $F$ preserves, [[equalizer]]s, then conservativity implies faithfulness.

=--

See [[conservative morphism]] for a generalization to an arbitrary [[2-category]].

## Examples


+-- {: .num_prop #PullbackAlongEpimorphisms}
###### Proposition

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[category]] with [[pullbacks]]. Given any [[morphism]] $f \colon X \longrightarrow Y$ in $\mathcal{C}$ write

$$
  f^\ast \colon \mathcal{C}_{/Y} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}_{/X}
$$

for the [[functor]] of pullback along $f$ between [[slice categories]] ([[base change]]). If [[strong epimorphisms]] in $\mathcal{C}$ are preserved by pullback, then the following are equivalent:

1. $f$ is a [[strong epimorphism]];

1. $f^\ast$ is conservative.

=--

(e.g. [Johnstone, lemma A.1.3.2](#Jonstone))


+-- {: .num_example #FullyFaithfulFunctorIsConservative}
###### Example

Every [[fully faithful functor]] is a conservative functor.
An example of a functor that is conservative but not fully faithful is the inclusion of the groupoid core of a category into the category.

=--

+-- {: .num_example #ConservativeFunctorsBetweenPretoposesAreInjectiveOnSubobjectLattices}
###### Example

When $C$ and $D$ are [[pretopos|pretoposes]], a pretopos morphism $F : C \to D$ is conservative if and only if for every object $c \in C$, the induced map between [[poset of subobjects | subobject lattices]] $F^{(c)} : \operatorname{Sub}(c) \to \operatorname{Sub}(F(c))$ is injective.

=--

+-- {: .num_example #MonadicFunctorIsConservative}
###### Example

Every [[monadic functor]] is a conservative functor: given a $T$-algebra homomorphism $f : A \to B$, the inverse $f^{-1} : B \to A$ is easily seen to also be a $T$-algebra homomorphism.

=--


## Properties

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

A conservative functor $F : C \to D$ [[reflected limit|reflects]] all [[limits]] and [[colimits]] that it [[preserved limit|preserves]] and which exist in the source category.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Let $K : J \to C$ be a [[diagram]] in $C$ whose limit $\lim K$ exists and such that $\lim F\circ K \simeq F \lim K$. Then if $const_c \to K$ is a [[cone]] in $C$ that is sent to a limiting cone $F const_c$ in $D$, then by the [[universal property]] of the limit in $D$ the morphism $F( c \to \lim K)$ is an isomorphism in $D$, hence must have been an isomorphism in $C$, hence $const_c$ must have been a limiting cone in $C$.

The arguments for colimits is analogous.
=--




## Related concepts

* [[conservative (∞,1)-functor]]

## Literature


* Geun Bin Im, [[Gregory Maxwell Kelly]], _Some remarks on conservative functors with left adjoints_,  J. Korean Math. Soc. __23__ (1986),  no. 1, 19&#8211;33, [MR87i:18002b](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=843247), [pdf](http://mathnet.kaist.ac.kr/mathnet/thesis_file/JKMS-23-1-19-33.pdf); _On classes of morphisms closed under limits_, J. Korean Math. Soc. __23__ (1986), no. 1, 1&#8211;18, _Adjoint-triangle theorems for conservative functors_, Bull. Austral. Math. Soc. __36__ (1987),  no. 1, 133&#8211;136, [MR88k:18005](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=897429), [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S000497270002637X) 

* {#Jonstone} [[Peter Johnstone]], _[[Sketches of an Elephant]]_


For an example of a conservative, but not faithful, functor $f: A\to Set$ having a left adjoint see Example 2.4 in

* Reinhard B&#246;rger, [[Walter Tholen]], _Strong regular and dense generators_, [[Cahiers]] de Topologie et G&#233;om&#233;trie Diff&#233;rentielle Cat&#233;goriques __32__, no. 3 (1991), p. 257-276, [MR1158111](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=1158111), [numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CTGDC_1991__32_3_257_0)

[[!redirects conservative functors]]
