In [[classical physics]], every [[classical mechanics|classical mechanical]] system (possibly even with infinitely many [[degree of freedom|degrees of freedom]], as for a [[classical field theory]]) has an **action functional** on the space of [[path|paths]] in the [[configuration space]].  This determines the laws of motion by the **action principle**: the motion of a particle corresponds to a path in configuration space which minimizes (or at least extremises) the action functional.


The action functional is normally obtained by integrating the [[Lagrangean]] function along the path; in the case of a continuum system, the Lagrangean function is obtained by integrating the Lagrangean density on space.  For a more manifestly [[relativity|relativistic]] formulation, we may obtain the action functional by integrating the Lagrangean density on [[spacetime]].

1. $ S(q) = \int_a^b L(q,\dot{q}) \,\mathrm{d}t $, where $q$ is a path through configuration space, on the time interval $[a,b]$, with derivative $\dot{q} = \mathrm{d}q/\mathrm{d}t$.  When minimising the action, we fix the values of $q(a)$ and $q(b)$.
2. $ L(q,\dot{q}) = \int_{S} \mathcal{L}(q,\dot{q}) \,\mathrm{d}x\,\mathrm{d}y\,\mathrm{d}z $, where now $q$ is a configuration of fields on $S$, which is a region of space.  We fix boundary conditions on the boundary of $S$ (typically that $q$ and $\dot{q}$ go to zero if $S$ is all of space).
3. $ S(q) = \int_{R} \mathcal{L}(q,\dot{q}) \,\mathrm{d}x\,\mathrm{d}y\,\mathrm{d}z\,\mathrm{d}t $, where now $q$ is a configuration of fields on $R$, which a region of spacetime, with time derivative $\dot{q} = \partial{q}/\partial{t}$.  We fix boundary conditions on the boundary of $R$.

The formulation of (3) above is still not manifestly coordinate indepdendent.  However, $\mathrm{d}x\,\mathrm{d}y\,\mathrm{d}z\,\mathrm{d}t$ is simply the [[volume form]] on spacetime and $\dot{q}$ is merely one choice of coordinate on [[state space]] and could just as easily be replaced by a derivative with respect to any timelike coordinate on spacetime (or drop coordinates altogether).


The [[path integral]] version of [[quantization]] emphasises the Lagrangean formalism and path integrals.  Most other approaches to quantization favor the Hamiltonian approach and [[phase space]].)  In the path integral approach, the amplitudes in [[quantum field theory]] are expressed in terms of the [[path integral]] of the action functional over the space of paths in the space of field configurations.