pages/7/0/6/8/18607/content.md, before:


* [webpage](http://www.phas.ubc.ca/~mav/vanraamsdonk.html)

* [Wikipedia entry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Van_Raamsdonk)

## Selected writings

On the [[non-abelian DBI action]] for [[intersecting branes]] with non-abelian [[gauge enhancement]] on their worldvolume:

* [[Washington Taylor]], [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Multiple D$p$-branes in Weak Background Fields_, Nucl. Phys. B573:703-734, 2000 ([arXiv:hep-th/9910052](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9910052))


On the [[BMN matrix model]]:

* {#DSJVR02} [[Keshav Dasgupta]], [[Mohammad Sheikh-Jabbari]], [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Matrix Perturbation Theory For M-theory On a PP-Wave_, JHEP 0205:056, 2002 ([arXiv:hep-th/0205185](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0205185))

* [[Keshav Dasgupta]], [[Mohammad Sheikh-Jabbari]], [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Protected Multiplets of M-Theory on a Plane Wave_, JHEP 0209:021, 2002 ([arXiv:hep-th/0207050](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0207050))


On [[M5-branes]] in the [[BMN matrix model]]:

* [[Juan Maldacena]], [[Mohammad Sheikh-Jabbari]], [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Transverse Fivebranes in Matrix Theory_, JHEP 0301:038, 2003 ([arXiv:hep-th/0211139](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211139))

On the [[mass-deformed ABJM model]] and the [[Myers effect]] for [[M2 branes]] ([[M2-M5 brane bound states]]):

* [[Jaume Gomis]], Diego Rodriguez-Gomez, [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], [[Herman Verlinde]], _A Massive Study of M2-brane Proposals_, JHEP 0809:113, 2008 ([arXiv:0807.1074](https://arxiv.org/abs/0807.1074))



On a variant of the [[Witten-Sakai-Sugimoto model]] for [[holographic QCD]] with [[D4-brane|D4]] [[flavor branes]]:

* [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], Kevin Whyte, _Baryon charge from embedding topology and a continuous meson spectrum in a new holographic gauge theory_, JHEP 1005:073, 2010 ([arxiv:0912.0752](https://arxiv.org/abs/0912.0752))


On [[holographic entanglement entropy]]:

* [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Building up spacetime with quantum entanglement_, Gen. Rel. Grav. 42:2323-2329, 2010; Int. J. Mod. Phys.D19:2429-2435,2010 ([arXiv:1005.3035](https://arxiv.org/abs/1005.3035)) 

* [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Building up spacetime with quantum entanglement II: It from BC-bit_ ([arXiv:1809.01197](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.01197))

* [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Lectures on Gravity and Entanglement_, chapter 5 in  New Frontiers in Fields and Strings
TASI 2015 Proceedings of the 2015 Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics 2015 Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics ([arXiv:1609.00026](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.00026))


* {#HMPSR19}  Felix M. Haehl, Eric Mintun, Jason Pollack, Antony J. Speranza, [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Nonlocal multi-trace sources and bulk entanglement in holographic conformal field theories_, 	J. High Energ. Phys. (2019) 2019: 005
([arxiv:1904.01584](https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.01584), [talk recording](https://youtu.be/kRCwzyliJ1M))

and specifically for [[AdS2/CFT1]] with the [[BFSS matrix model]]:

* Tarek Anous, Joanna L. Karczmarek, Eric Mintun, [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], Benson Way, _Areas and entropies in BFSS/gravity duality_ ([arXiv:1911.11145](https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.11145))



## Related $n$Lab entries

* [[holographic entanglement entropy]]

category: people

Commit message:

Revision ID: 164860 Update date: 2021-05-28 15:37:14+00:00 Page name: Mark Van Raamsdonk

pages/7/0/6/8/18607/content.md, after:


* [webpage](http://www.phas.ubc.ca/~mav/vanraamsdonk.html)

* [Wikipedia entry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Van_Raamsdonk)

## Selected writings

On the [[non-abelian DBI action]] for [[intersecting branes]] with non-abelian [[gauge enhancement]] on their worldvolume:

* [[Washington Taylor]], [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Multiple D$p$-branes in Weak Background Fields_, Nucl. Phys. B573:703-734, 2000 ([arXiv:hep-th/9910052](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9910052))


On the [[BMN matrix model]]:

* {#DSJVR02} [[Keshav Dasgupta]], [[Mohammad Sheikh-Jabbari]], [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Matrix Perturbation Theory For M-theory On a PP-Wave_, JHEP 0205:056, 2002 ([arXiv:hep-th/0205185](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0205185))

* [[Keshav Dasgupta]], [[Mohammad Sheikh-Jabbari]], [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Protected Multiplets of M-Theory on a Plane Wave_, JHEP 0209:021, 2002 ([arXiv:hep-th/0207050](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0207050))


On [[M5-branes]] in the [[BMN matrix model]]:

* [[Juan Maldacena]], [[Mohammad Sheikh-Jabbari]], [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Transverse Fivebranes in Matrix Theory_, JHEP 0301:038, 2003 ([arXiv:hep-th/0211139](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211139))

On the [[mass-deformed ABJM model]] and the [[Myers effect]] for [[M2 branes]] ([[M2-M5 brane bound states]]):

* [[Jaume Gomis]], Diego Rodriguez-Gomez, [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], [[Herman Verlinde]], _A Massive Study of M2-brane Proposals_, JHEP 0809:113, 2008 ([arXiv:0807.1074](https://arxiv.org/abs/0807.1074))



On a variant of the [[Witten-Sakai-Sugimoto model]] for [[holographic QCD]] with [[D4-brane|D4]] [[flavor branes]]:

* [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], Kevin Whyte, _Baryon charge from embedding topology and a continuous meson spectrum in a new holographic gauge theory_, JHEP 1005:073, 2010 ([arxiv:0912.0752](https://arxiv.org/abs/0912.0752))


On [[holographic entanglement entropy]]:

* [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Building up spacetime with quantum entanglement_, Gen. Rel. Grav. 42:2323-2329, 2010; Int. J. Mod. Phys.D19:2429-2435,2010 ([arXiv:1005.3035](https://arxiv.org/abs/1005.3035)) 

* [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Building up spacetime with quantum entanglement II: It from BC-bit_ ([arXiv:1809.01197](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.01197))

* [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Lectures on Gravity and Entanglement_, chapter 5 in  New Frontiers in Fields and Strings
TASI 2015 Proceedings of the 2015 Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics 2015 Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics ([arXiv:1609.00026](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.00026))


* {#HMPSR19}  Felix M. Haehl, Eric Mintun, Jason Pollack, Antony J. Speranza, [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], _Nonlocal multi-trace sources and bulk entanglement in holographic conformal field theories_, 	J. High Energ. Phys. (2019) 2019: 005
([arxiv:1904.01584](https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.01584), [talk recording](https://youtu.be/kRCwzyliJ1M))

and specifically for [[AdS2/CFT1]] with the [[BFSS matrix model]]:

* Tarek Anous, Joanna L. Karczmarek, Eric Mintun, [[Mark Van Raamsdonk]], Benson Way, _Areas and entropies in BFSS/gravity duality_ ([arXiv:1911.11145](https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.11145))

On [[D-branes]]:

> *[The Amazing Matrix in String Theory](http://www.physics.mcgill.ca/seminars/PSC_van-raamsdonk.html)* (2006)

> Most of the dramatic progress in string theory over the past decade has in some way involved the degrees of freedom of D-branes, solitonic objects in string theory whose low energy physics is described by quantum field theories living on the branes. Essential to many of the applications of D-brane physics is the fact that the number of degrees of freedom of a collection of branes scales not as the number of branes, but as the square of the number of branes. In particular, the fields describing the low energy physics of the branes, including even the coordinates describing the transverse fluctuations of D-branes, become matrix valued. At the classical level, this implies that D-brane configurations are described by a new kind of geometry, with such dramatic possibilities as objects that can change their dimension dynamically. Quantum mechanically, these matrix degrees of freedom can give rise to quantum field theories unlike any studied previously, and most dramatically, to new nonperturbative formulations of string theory and quantum gravity. In this talk, I will review some basic aspects of D-branes and their matrix degrees of freedom, some of the fascinating classical and quantum phenomena associated with these matrix degrees of freedom, and some aspects of the truly remarkable new nonperturbative formulations of string theory.




## Related $n$Lab entries

* [[holographic entanglement entropy]]


[[!redirects Mark van Raamsdonk]]


category: people
