## Idea

On the one hand, there is [syntax](internal+language).  On the other hand, there is [semantics](structure).  Model theory is (roughly) about the relations between the two.

A model theory for a particular [[logic]] typically works within a given [[universe]], and specifies a notion of _structure for a language_, and a _definition of truth_.

In all memorable examples, the collection of structures for a language will form an interesting category, and the subcollection of those structures verifying a given collection $Th$ of propositions in the language are an interesting subcategory again.

## Examples

### First Order Logic, 

---

_Caveat Lector_
This may duplicate/contradict other nLab accounts of FOL; it is present here for illustrative purposes only.  We attempt to obviate the trouble of quantifier scope by using _addressing_ rather than _naming_ of variables; specifically, the variable $x_n$ occurs _bound_ in a formula if it is nested within more than $n$ quantifiers, and otherwise _free_.

---

We describe an operad $L$ in $Set$ over two types, $W$ and $P$ for "words" and "propositions", respectively.  The full operad is freely generated by various disjoint suboperads
* a free suboperad $O$ of operations, or functions, of types $W^n\to W$;
* an $\mathbb{N}$-indexed suboperad $X$ of variables of types $1\to W$;
* a (free) suboperad $R$ of predicates, or relations, of types $W^n\to P$;
* the equality operad, of type $W^2\to P$
* the boolean operad, $B$: it's got $\wedge, \vee,\neg,\dots$ of types $P^{k}\to P$ for $k=1,2$, and perhaps $k=0$ if you want to include $\bot$; these compose the way you think they should.
* the quantifier $\forall:$, usually written $\forall x_j$, where $x_j\in X_0$; \forall is of type $P\to P$.

Notable subsets of $L$ include $O[X]$, generated by $O\cup X$, the suboperad of parametrized words, and $R[X]$, the elements of types $? \to P$ in the suboperad generated by $O,R,X$.

Abusively, an $L$-_structure_, or _interpretation_ of the functions and relations is an algebra $(W,P,O,R)\mapsto (M,2,O_M,R_M)$ for the suboperad $Q$ of $L$ generated by $O\cup R$ with the type $P$ interpreted by the initial boolean algebra $2$.

The _Tarski Definition of Truth_ is a [natural](functor) extension of the $Q$-algebra $M$ to an $L$-algebra, $(M,\dots)$ such that
* for $\Phi$ in $R[X]$ and for all functions $m:X\to M$, the sensible thing $\Phi[m]$ is true in $M$.
* $\Phi \wedge \Theta$ is true if for all functions $m:X\to M$, both $\Phi[m]$ and $\Theta[m]$ are true, and $\neg \Phi$ is true if and only if $\Phi$ is _not_.
* $(\forall:\Phi)[m]$ is true in $M$ precisely when $\Phi[m_a]$ is true for all $a\in M$, where
$$m_a(x_i) = \left\{ \array{ a & i=0 \\ m(x_{i-1}) & else }\right. $$

(Again, this really should be written more clearly, but it's a start.)

+--{: .query}
[[JCMcKeown]]: is there some nicer way to say the quantifier nonsense? I'm thinking along the lines
> there are two actions of $\mathbb{N}$ on $L$: one shifts all the variables by 1, the other adds a $\forall$ quantifier; and the Tarski extension is the one that makes these commute somehow

=--

## Important results

(...)