A **topological vector space**, or **TVS** for short, is a [[vector space]] $X$ (generally over the [[field]] $k = \mathbb{R}$ or $k = \mathbb{C}$) equipped with a [[topological space|topology]] for which the addition and scalar multiplication maps 
$$+: X \times X \to X, \qquad \cdot: k \times X \to X$$ 
are continuous (where $k$ is given its standard topology).

Much as a [[topological group]] is a [[group object]] in [[Top]], so a TVS is a vector space [[internalization|internal to]] $Top$ ... *but* not just any vector space in $Top$ is a TVS!  The reason is that, in a vector space internal to $Top$, $\cdot$ only need be continuous in the second variable; in other words, this concept uses the [[discrete topology]] on $k$.  So only some vector spaces in $Top$ are TVSes.

Like any topological [[abelian group]], a TVS $X$ carries a [[uniform space]] structure generated by a basis of entourages that correspond to neighborhoods $U$ of $0$: 
$$\{(u, v) \in X \times X: u - v \in U\}$$

Thus a host of uniform notions (uniform continuity, completeness, etc.) carry over to the TVS context. Also from the uniformity (although it is also easy to prove directly), it follows that a TVS is completely regular, and also Hausdorff if and only if it is $T_0$. Most authors insist on the $T_0$ condition to rule out degenerate cases, but that prevents the category of TVSes from being [[topological concrete category|topological]] over [[Vect]].

+-- {: .query}
I have stopped us from assuming that $X$ is Hausdorff, not only for the reason just cited, but also to keep in line with our definitions of [[topological group]], [[compact space]], and so forth, which are also sometimes (but not here) required to be Hausdorff.  (To be sure, we didn\'t change, for example, [[Banach space]] so that it doesn\'t have to be Hausdorff, but that\'s because we have the terms 'pseudonormed vector space' and 'complete pseudonormed vector space' if we want them.)  ---Toby
=--

The condition that scalar multiplication is continuous puts significant constraints on the topology of $X$. For example, in the case $k = \mathbb{R}$, the [[locally compact space|local compactness]] of $k$ implies that for any non-zero $v \in X$, the function 
$$- \cdot v: k \to V$$ 
maps $k$ [[homeomorphism|homeomorphically]] onto its image. It follows quickly that $X$ cannot (for instance) be [[compact space|compact]] (unless it is the zero space and so has no non-zero $v$); a classical theorem along these lines is that $V$ can be locally compact Hausdorff if and only if $V$ is finite-dimensional. On the other hand, a TVS is [[path-connected space|path-connected]]. 

More classical material should be added, particular on locally convex TVSes, and so much more. 
