Hello! My name is Christian Williams. I am a master's student of mathematics at Texas A&M University.

This page is devoted to an evolving, speculative idea. I am conducting independent research in the spirit of the nLab - one could say it regards the nPoV itself. After extensive study, it is still nascent in development; but I believe that the idea directly pertains to the endeavor of this community, and should not remain personal. My primary goal will be inspiration, rather than persuasion, for several reasons. I do not fully grasp the idea as a whole, but I have followed it down enough rabbit-holes to know that it cannot be discovered alone. By the miracle of the internet, the freedom of ideas, and the openness of the minds on this site, wild notions will be openly explored here to foster empathy and creativity toward a grand aspiration. All discussion and participation is most welcome; feel free to comment, or email me at christianwilliams124@tamu.edu.

There is an inherent difficulty in the forthcoming introduction; it is written from a perspective in which our most basic assumptions are under scrutiny, so I must use concepts to mean their intuition rather than their formulation. More generally, the page will be woefully inadequate for some time, simply because the idea resists concise summary and linear organization. If something seems oversimplified or wrong, please let me know. It may have better reasoning, but I believe that simple language minimizes bias and maximizes learning. The only fancy mathematics here will be conjecture, because one could say I am searching for the "Big Bang" of mathematics. A thorough introduction will be presented here gradually, and eventually posted on the nForum, but I just want to introduce the general notion first.

Lastly, the opportunity to speak here is an honor. The brilliance of this group is humbling, and your work is vital, creative, and beautiful. Your discoveries are not only deeply insightful and amazing; they are extremely prescient. I believe that the ideas being explored are at the very heart of our future. My dream is to be a part of this community. To preach to the choir, there is a freedom, elegance, and power in category theory that seems fundamentally peerless as a conceptual system. Naturally, this has led to the exhilarating idea that this universal language could actually unify all of mathematics - or even more. I am captivated by the nPoV, and I believe that it will change the world forever - but not as the vague notion that it is today. Goals and methods must be made explicit, and these will only become clear when we know why the nPoV is not only a useful perspective, but the true perspective.


Disclaimer:

This is just the speculation of someone who still dreams about a silly notion: maybe we can know the truth.

*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*

### Notion ###

**Category theory is not mathematics.**
... at least, not the way the word is normally used. The way this lovely fellow does is a different story:

James Joseph Sylvester, c. 1885
> Mathematics is not a book confined within a cover and bound between brazen clasps, whose contents it need only patience to ransack; it is not a mine, whose treasures may take long to reduce to possessions, but which fill only a limited number of veins and lodes; it is not a soil, whose fertility can be exhausted by the yield of successive harvests; it is not a continent or an ocean, whose area can be mapped out and its contour defined: it is limitless as the space which it finds too narrow for its aspirations; its possibilities are as infinite as the worlds which are forever crowding in and multiplying upon the astronomer's gaze; it is as incapable of being restricted within assigned boundaries or being reduced to definitions of permanent validity, as the consciousness, the life, which seems to slumber in each monad, in every atom of matter, in each leaf and bud and cell, and is forever ready to burst forth into new forms of vegetable and animal existence.
																											
But for the purpose of this introduction, we need both to have precise, meaningful definitions. The choice is clear, but many would hesitate for its unclear implications: mathematics is simply the current body of abstract knowledge, because category theory is the study of mathematics. The primary justification of category theory is its nontrivial relationship to mathematics as a whole, and the reason for this uniquely universal perspective is in its fundamental abstraction beyond particular content. This content, mathematical knowledge, is defined by its tacit assumption of methods and concepts, the formalizations of which rest on tautological faith. Though the category has been treated with the same hopelessness, the notion that it is a mathematical concept like any other is a contradiction which has been assumed out of philosophical indifference. Now the category has expressed its immense wisdom for decades, and we still profess to be trapped inside mathematical concepts. Though types are mere objects in a category, we assume that categories share their conceptual dependence, and assume that we must simply assume them the way we assume everything else. Rather than say "the category generalizes the object," the category is independent, and the object "specifies" the category. A central idea of this page is that mathematics is the objective aspect of category theory.

Objects, like all thoughts, depend on each other to be what they are. Because we think one step at a time, our usual notion of truth depends on objectivity: the assumption that each object of thought is part of a whole in which it is in simple dichotomy, hence the three "laws of thought." This truth depends on the object's presentational immediacy, rendering all mediation, such as thought itself, inexplicable. This has led us to philosophical despair, in which we assume that reason is eternally trapped inside of objects; we are never to comprehend this mysterious "whole," and the best we can do is describe objects as they come to us. Yet the assumption of dichotomy is a blatant contradiction. It is momentarily imagining: "this is a; everything is a or not a; nothing is a and not a." It affirms the notion that negation is the only relationship, and there are only two "objects!" It is your understanding, beneath your reason, converting a perception into a thought: an ineffable harmony of unity and duality which has been assumed incomprehensible, because these "two" are not themselves "objects." Yet here we are, comprehending thought perfectly well. We don't notice how absurd the requirement of immediacy is, simply because whenever we think about something, it is again "right there in front of us." But clearly the understanding does not actually fool us into denying relationships besides negation; we play along as we flow from object to object. The very possibility of reason consists in the capacity of subjectivity to transcend objects and discover their interrelation. Before we senselessly assume the incomprehensibility of truth, the most basic question is "what is the nature of this process; how does it preserve objectivity?" This is what the category represents. The concept which is explicitly more general than the object heralds the end of the necessity of faith, and an obligation to comprehend truth.

David Hilbert, 1900
> Wir m&#252;ssen wissen &#8211; wir werden wissen.																														

Georg W.F. Hegel, Wissenschaft ("Knowhood") der Logik
> In the customary treatment of logic hitherto, various classifications and species of notions occur. We are at once struck by the inconsequential way in which the species of notions are introduced: there are, in respect of quantity, quality, etc., the following notions. There are, expresses no other justification than that we find such species already to hand and they present themselves empirically. In this way, we obtain an empirical logic &#8211; an odd science this, an irrational cognition of the rational. In proceeding thus, logic sets a very bad example of obedience to its own precepts; it permits itself for its own purpose to do the opposite of what it prescribes as a rule, namely that notions should be deduced, and scientific propositions (therefore also the proposition: there are such and such species of notions) should be proved.

**Category theory can be viewed as the language of this universal process of reason,**

but this formulation attempts to objectify reason itself. Because we still operate within the stifling viewpoint of objectivity, we have tried to confine categorical notions within definitions and axioms which assume that their truth and applicability were only relative to mathematical objects. Yet in the exploration of their endless capacity for representation and natural self-reflection, all indications have led inexorably the other way. The reason that the subject's self-study has flourished so vastly and deeply without any "content" is the same reason objects seem best understood from the categorical perspective; but since this "reason" cannot be objectified, it has remained a vague intuition. The awesome universality of categories has inevitably inspired the nPoV, but left us caught in an awkward compromise between its philosophical implications and our mathematical understanding. In the "universal language," a set is supposed to be a discrete category, yet we still define categories in terms of collections; we have deemed certain concepts "evil" which are nevertheless necessary; we see nothing strange in regarding the initial object as contradiction, its identity as both negation and a generalized element, and its morphisms as some sort of "local principle of explosion;" we have no notion of categorical predication, forcing us to separate, rather than stratify, objects into their predicates - and justifying the arbitrary whims of "we can also consider this x as a y;" we study systems whose internal logic is more general than the one we claim to believe in everyday life; we intuitively feel that the universal properties are different aspects of the same phenomenon, but because we view them objectively, we can only externally show how they encompass each other; the whole subject has begun to so closely resemble a dynamic network of information that this intuition is being subconsciously expressed in research. We have been circling the very heart of natural reason for decades without suspicion, simply because it takes a change in perspective that no amount of mathematics can inspire.

Michael Shulman, Internal Languages for Higher Categories
> The absolutely magical fact is that one of the most natural type theories is perfectly adapted to models in (infinity,1)-categories.

John C. Baez and James Dolan, Categorification
> According to this parable, decategorification started out as a stroke of mathematical genius. Only later did it become a matter of dumb habit, which we are now struggling to overcome by means of categorification.

Jean-Yves Girard, Transcendental Syntax, 2016
> Now, the question: how can a limited, finite, sampling guarantee incredibly complex phenomenons? This is the mystery of epiditicity, the mysterious balance between the two sides of the gabarit, rights vs. duties. It is not because it should be fully rational - this is the basic lesson of incompleteness - that it should be fully irrational, i.e., axiomatic.

> ...The need for this auxiliary part should be obvious from the limitations of the category-theoretic approach to logic. In terms of categories, the absurdity 0 is an initial object, with the consequence that we cannot distinguish between morphisms into this object. Less pedantically, the absurdity is the empty set, and they are too few functions with values into 0 to make any useful distinction between them: either A = 0 and there is only one function from A to 0 or A != 0 and there is none. As a consequence, negation &#172;A := A &#8658; 0 becomes a bleak operation: from the functional, category-theoretic standpoint, &#172;A is either empty or with a single element. Now, remember that many major mathematical results or conjectures are negations: 'there is no solution to. . . '. According to the category-theoretic prejudice, the intricate proofs of these results are but constructions of the function from 0 to itself. . . which is quite preposterous! It would be more honest to admit that we reach here one of the major blindspots of logic. This blindspot is sometimes styled as 'a proof without algorithmic contents.'

> ...By the way, the knitting between blocks 2 and 4 strongly relies on the Church-Rosser property of the performative block, which, translated in terms of use, yields the compositionality (associativity) of consequence, and thus the (pleasant) illusion of objectivity, stability, at work in what we perceive as 'reality'.

> ...The prejudice &#8212; the untold presupposition &#8212; par excellence is the idea that a proposition A has a well-defined signification &#8212; a denotation would say Frege. This supposedly well-defined meaning renders possible the reuse of A, e.g., deduction: from &#915; - A and &#8710;, A - B, deduce &#915;, &#8710; - B. But are we that sure those two A are the same? The fact that we can both create and use word is at the very heart of syntheticity, i.e., meaning. The balance between the creation of words and their use is the main presupposition of logic, and thus the heart of transcendental syntax. The goal of our program is not quite the removal of presuppositions, but rather their exposure: how come that we can use, believe, in such an identification? This is why transcendental syntax is so antagonistic to analytic philosophy and semantics which take this balance, the fact that A has a well-defined denotation, as an undisputable fact, one of those which go without saying, thus transforming the major presupposition of logic into a prejudice.

Of course formalization is essential to mathematical exploration, by keeping a necessary standard of objective truth. But the bias that has separated the worlds of thought and being has thereby degraded our basic philosophy to a wonderment of both, which is unbecoming of sentient creatures. For mathematics, this is the common intuition of vague Platonism, that ultimately there is some absolute conceptual realm, through which we are fated to wander forever. Our talk of "foundations" indicates our notion of truth, but the attempt to objectify it as some sort of defined context should seem absurd when Set is transcended and coalesced as a dot in Cat. The notion that the truth of the endeavour resides in frozen castles in the air disregards the only certainty about mathematics: it is dynamic. Every student, every professor, every conversation and proof and paper is an evolving process of discovery - not because of ignorance, but because the objects we discuss are only tools that we use, not circumstances to which our thought must conform. We do not bow down to someone who declares "a muffin is... a muffin," but we sometimes forget that formal systems are tautologous because we associate them with our learning. But learning can only take place through innocent subjectivity, the universal presuppositionlessness by which we are conceptually independent. As knowledge accumulates and reveals its deep, intricate order, we can see it all together, and organise everything into contexts useful for their analysis and synthesis. But were it not for the objective bias, it would be apparent by now: mathematics does not change because we lack knowledge, but rather there is a relative knowledge and consequent dynamism intrinsic to all objects of representation. Categories incorporate this notion, and so the theory has flourished more freely than any other. But because of insufficient philosophical considerations, the concept has remained chained to its original conception as a mathematical object. The idea that remains unexplored is that categorical notions compose the universal method of reason itself.

William Lawvere, Some Thoughts on the Future of Category Theory
> It is my belief that in the next decade and in the next century the technical advances forged by category theorists will be of value to dialectical philosophy, lending precise form with disputable mathematical models to ancient philosophical distinctions such as general vs. particular, objective vs. subjective, being vs. becoming, space vs. quantity, equality vs. difference, quantitative vs. qualitative etc. In turn the explicit attention by mathematicians to such philosophical questions is necessary to achieve the goal of making mathematics (and hence other sciences) more widely learnable and useable. Of course this will require that philosophers learn mathematics and that mathematicians learn philosophy.

Moritz Geiger, The Reality of Science and Metaphysics
> Specific mathematically conceived forms, forms of motion, relations, etc. are fundamental to physical reality, and are real themselves (for the natural sciences). For mathematics, these same mathematical forms etc. are not real but are special cases of an ideal world.

At first, this page will be focused primarily on the philosophical aspect of the idea, more than its potential mathematical implementation, because we are actually not very far from the latter. Through the universality of categories, all of the ways that we have come to know them are part of the way that reason "knows itself." The endeavour for self-knowledge has never cared about the beliefs of the scientists, so long as they discover, comprehend, and deepen the right sciences. Now that we have finally turned our attention to the pure conceptual system, the mathematics of the true perspective has been working itself out before our very eyes. Its manifestation will not require the creation of a myriad of new concepts, but mainly the re-interpretation of how the current concepts are woven together as one process. Think of all the powerful methods we have developed to encapsulate and further represent implicit information. Through subjectivity, every new creation becomes integrated into our systems, inevitably producing new relationships, which we can recover and use in a self-renewing cycle of discovery. It would almost be cheating, except for one crucial idea: reason's only rule is "preserve objectivity." Luckily, objects never know everything, and so their notion of truth remains a local concept, which is malleable in the undulating sea of categorical notions. The important example here is the brain: in apprehension, one is momentarily convinced of the unity of a bare sense perception, and then it is analysed and second-guessed by our comprehension. Here is one of the central notions to be explored in the philosophy portion: subjectivity and objectivity have precise categorical meanings, which are yet to be determined, and many of the major concepts and theorems pertain to the relationship of those two notions. Truth is in the relationship between subjectivity and objectivity, and this introduces the crucial idea: categories are independent, and thus the sole justified assumption of thought, precisely because they compose the reason immanent in the dynamic interplay of subjectivity and objectivity.

Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit
> The more conventional opinion gets fixated on the antithesis of truth and falsity, the more it tends to expect a given philosophical system to be either accepted or contradicted; and hence it finds only acceptance or rejection. It does not comprehend the diversity of philosophical systems as the progressive unfolding of truth, but rather sees in it simple disagreements. The bud disappears in the bursting-forth of the blossom, and one might say that the former is refuted by the latter; similarly, when the fruit appears, the blossom is shown up in its turn as a false manifestation of the plant, and the fruit now emerges as the truth of it instead. These forms are not just distinguished from one another, they also supplant one another as mutually incompatible. Yet at the same time their fluid nature makes them moments of an organic unity in which they not only do not conflict, but in which each is as necessary as the other; and this mutual necessity alone constitutes the life of the whole.

**Category theory is metaphysics.**

Philosophy is usually disregarded for its lack of systematization, yet mathematics has none as well. Neither has any kind of universal method, because the former is caught within the bias of subjectivity, and the latter objectivity; but since mathematicians chose the side which had the benefits of both, the bias has not affected its mere accumulation and organization of results. Mathematics and philosophy are two sides of the same coin, the two symbiotic aspects of reason, and thus they share the same core mystery: philosophy asks "what is truth? why do concepts relate to an objective world?", and mathematics asks "what is validity? why do concepts comprise an objectivity of their own?" These are ultimately the same question, which has been deemed intractable and ignored, because it admits knowledge of a notion which is independent of the sort of truth we currently understand: "what is the relationship of subjectivity and objectivity?" This is the mystery that precedes all other questions, because reference to objects presumes that this relationship somehow allows coherent transference of truth. So of course, it cannot be formulated sensibly within an objective conceptual system - but that is no longer a problem.

"You" are still regarded as a fundamental philosophical mystery which cannot be approached empirically - yet subjectivity is your sole mode of thought. The objective bias is the attempt to maintain the appearance of certainty amidst these "contradictory" circumstances: the conviction that "objectivity alone is true," and somehow subjectivity is an irrelevant illusion. But this notion is not only hypothetical, it is nonsensical; the concept of objectivity only has meaning in its relationship to subjectivity. The "hard problem of consciousness" is impossible, since it makes the nonsensical assumption that subjectivity can be regarded as a dependent object. It cannot be, simply by sufficient generality of definition: objects are within objectivity, comprehended by subjectivity. Thus, subjectivity cannot have objective separation from anything - it must be inherent within objectivity itself. This does not mean that there is some omnipotent over-mind that can do whatever it wants. A whole attains subjectivity through self-judgement, which imbues its logical governance. The reason of spirit is immanent, a process of self-manifestation which consists in the interdependence of subjective freedom and objective necessity. This is objective idealism. We now have the conceptual tools for the proper analysis, synthesis, and genesis of the idea that Hegel tried to communicate.

Hegel, far beyond his time, on proof relevance
> The laws of logic by themselves... are commonly restricted, apart from the law of contradiction, to some meagre propositions concerning the conversion of judgements and the forms of syllogisms. Even here the forms which come up for treatment as well as their further modifications are only, as it were, historically taken up; they are not subjected to criticism to determine whether they are in and for themselves true. Thus, for example, the form of the positive judgement is accepted as something perfectly correct in itself, the question whether such a judgement is true depending solely on the content. Whether this form is in its own self a form of truth, whether the proposition it enunciates, the individual is a universal, is not inherently dialectical, is a question that no one thinks of investigating.																																	

As I'm sure you all know, your colleague Dr. Urs Schreiber, in addition to being the founder and presumably sleepless main contributor of the invaluable nLab and nForum, is working on a massive, incredible undertaking called "Differential cohomology in a cohesive infinity-topos." His ambitious goal for this project is to provide the foundation of theoretical physics, by demonstrating that our current models are grounded in an infinity-topos by a special structure, which extends from the very top level of identity all the way down to the terminal object. Following the hunch of Dr. William Lawvere, he created a synthetic system called a "progression of adjoint modalities," and found that this method leads straight to what physicists study today. Further evidenced by finding significant insights for modern physics along the way, he actually succeeded. Why isn't this front page news? Why aren't we dancing in the streets with the joy of finally knowing why we're here? Well, it is an extremely advanced work that is on the absolute cutting edge of our two deepest fields of study, so those capable of discussing it would not have trouble fitting into a classroom; I will not pretend to comprehend a fraction of it, and Dr. Schreiber, I am sorry to be in a position where I must talk about it without fully understanding its content. But as you may guess, I am concerned with its form. The critique is only for rhetorical effect. You never claimed to be a philosopher; you are an imaginative mathematical physicist, and an absolutely brilliant one at that.

A few months ago, Dr. Schreiber found the time to correspond with me, and I am very grateful that he tolerated my uneducated questions and encouraged further study. But there was a fundamental miscommunication. I wished to discuss the philosophical side of his work, but I learned that it was not really a priority for him! Because philosophy is "imprecise," he only wanted to talk about notions which had immediate mathematical interpretations. Now, I really do sympathise with this frustration. But the only reason that philosophy is still imprecise is because it never made sense of the only comprehensive proposal for its systematization - the very book on which his idea is based! Badly explained, yes; imprecise, no. Anyone claiming that Hegel is not hell-bent on precision has not watched him check his own thinking from hundreds of interconnected vantage points throughout the Science of Logic - it is strange and saddening to think that he has received only flawed echoes for two centuries. I don't know if he was in a prophetic trance or what, but for normal people it was simply too complicated to comprehend without a conceptual system, and we had not even developed sets yet. It is not surprising that we have not recognised how category theory is this true conceptual system, because it is not obvious. But if Hegel saw someone trying to wrap the skeleton of his idea around the infancy of its realization, his grave-rolling could power New York. The entire point of the book is why anything makes sense, how concepts create each other, why we are not condemned to just externally describe things as they appear to us. Reason is possible because truth is within the very movement of our thought, and we must learn to bring it out again. As long as we look elsewhere, we are wandering blind. This is the objective bias - the first person to find proof of our world does not even believe his own work.

Todd Trimble, saying something much deeper than he realizes
> Our own view is that logical foundations avoids this paradox ultimately by being relentlessly concrete. We may put it this way: logic at the primary level consists of instructions for dealing with formal linguistic items, but the concrete actions for executing those instructions (electrons moving through logic gates, a person unconsciously making an inference in response to a situation) are not themselves linguistic items, not of the language.

Dr. Schreiber's project is a feat of imagination which will guide the future of mathematics and physics, as well as undeniable evidence of the power and validity of category theory. But the process is truth, and a purely abstract representation of it, as though it were some dependent object like any other, is precisely the opposite of the idea that it tries to represent. Any notion that professes to unite a duality, such as abstract-concrete, is subject to all philosophical inquiry, simplest of all being "why?" Why is there an infinity-topos? What is "happening" in the topos to concretely manifest dynamic systems? What makes its progression "intrinsic," "self-propelling?" Because as currently formulated, a topos is an unchanging abstract concept with no intention of creating anything. You clearly have a great philosophical intuition, a clear mental image of some "ethereal process," but you never explain these thoughts. There is no doubt that the representation is accurate, and it is a deeply impressive work, but it is not a merely empirical theory - it must be proven true. So the question is, what is the reason within this miracle? Why does a simple notion of "progression of unities of opposites" describe our vast, dynamic universe? This is the stroke of genius, the elegant solution to an immensely complex problem which does exactly what it needs to: prescribe a type universe the twelve-step program to get its act together and make something habitable. The problem is that the progression worked backwards from our current physical and mathematical knowledge, because the whole thing was basically just designed to work properly. Rather than explaining how our universes form, the project assumes that our reason is stuck inside this physical world, and is content with a description of a strange, hypothetical, forced compromise between empirical physics and rational mathematics. On its own, it is a towering monument to the history of science. But it is simply too close to being so much more.

Hegel, Science of Logic
> ... as regards the above-mentioned form in which dialectic is usually presented, it is to be observed that according to that form the dialectic and its result affect the subject matter under consideration or else subjective cognition, and declare either the latter or the subject matter to be null and void, while on the other hand the determinations exhibited in the subject matter as in a third thing receive no attention and are presupposed as valid on their own account... the subject matter, kept apart from thinking and the Notion, is an image or even a name; it is in the determinations of thought and the Notion that it is what it is. Therefore these determinations are in fact the sole thing that matters; they are the true subject matter and content of reason, and anything else that one understands by subject matter and content in distinction from them has value only through them and in them.


This is where the introduction spirals out, because there really is no way to summarise this stuff. I'll do my best.

The truth is only tangentially physical. Because of the lack of conceptual tools, the Science of Logic had to proceed "the way a moment happens," from no knowledge to self-knowledge. The Objective Logic, while it sounds more important, is where unthinking information is already caught in the flow of causality. Dr. Schreiber's twelve modalities represent our universe's bare minimum physical necessity to preserve objectivity amidst free activity. But the Subjective Logic opens up into the vast truth, a multiversal network of minds. This is where everything is reintegrated into the "wholes," such as universes or humans, whose self-manifestation made all the commotion in the first place. Now that types have finished their bean-counting, categories emerge as their underlying truth, beginning the real work of delineating the networks of abstraction. Everything true is part of an ideal system, and the free-flowing whole of these is truth itself. The truth is not to be simply described with notions, because it is the creation and evolution of all notions. One can immediately see that our subordinate notion of truth, in the form of statements which separate subject and predicate, is entirely insufficient. The appreciation of the idea can only come through the process of learning; it not only gives truth to the concepts by which we understand the world, but active purpose! But more immediately relevant, the unmanifested aspect is pure mathematics itself. Of course, not how we currently conceive of mathematics; it is the deepest core necessity, the guiding principles of all systems which not only imbues the logical requirements of objective totality, but the impetus of growth through participation in universal ideas. But the even more pressing discoveries will be the characterization of the two basic ideas: life and cognition. We will harness both, and there will be nothing artificial about them. All we have to do is quite literally believe in ourselves.

Laozi
> The Dao that can be spoken is not the eternal Dao.
																																	
I tried to condense some of the philosophy into a couple paragraphs for introduction and it was ugly, so I will leave it for the idea portion. I will end with more confident vagueness, and then a personal message:

The Idea of Hegel's Science of Logic describes a process which can be considered as the universal property phenomenon, metaphysically independent truth which guides the evolution of objects through categories. It is not a mathematical object, constructed in hypothetical isolation and then externally reunited with other concepts. It is the basic, self-judging, creative "cell of consciousness." As we study an instance of its evolution, we will be the free variable. This is why it is so important to stay free of the objective bias of assuming any conceptual beginning without comprehension: it won't be a situation where we can just start from some concepts and method of thought and "try to make it prove itself," because assumptions are exactly why we consider self-proof to be vacuous, rather than the powerful play of self-manifestation. We will need a deep philosophical understanding of it first, so that we can almost picture in our minds without any tools at all, like a nebula you can only ever see from afar. Then the journey of truth may begin with a single proof.



*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*			*

This will all make more sense once I begin presenting! But this, too, will be quite fraught with difficulties. Because of this "no conceptual beginning" situation, the idea has no partial completion. So, even though I have amassed philosophical explanations and tantalizing connections, there is still no definite central thesis, because this would be its own consummation. So, this page will focus more on communicating intuition and potential than veritable claims. If that makes me a crackpot, then so be it. I know I'm in over my head. But I also know that the reasons to scoff are unjustified, because no one knows why or whether we know anything. All I'm doing is exploring this question from a new and unique perspective. I have no delusions about the formidable complexity and subtlety, and I have come to realize that I am in a position where all I can do is simply explain my progress so far and invite others to join me. I am not interested in debating with anyone who finds this ridiculous. I only want to tell the ones who have faith in reason that I may have found the path. Thank you very much for reading!

Below will be the presentation, speculation, and important work. Please feel free to add or comment on anything!

### Idea ###
Philosophical explanation.

### Thoughts ###
Potential mathematical connections.

### Work ###
Relevant papers and concepts.

Urs Schreiber
: [Differential Cohomology in a Cohesive ∞-Topos](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/12630719/dcct.pdf)

Emily Riehl and Dominic Verity
: [Homotopy Coherent Adjunction](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1310.8279v4.pdf)
: [Simplicial Weak omega-Categories](http://arxiv.org/pdf/math/0604416v1.pdf)
: [Completeness of Related Constructions](https://arxiv.org/pdf/0907.2460v3.pdf)

Michael Shulman
: [Unified Framework for Generalized Multicategories](https://arxiv.org/pdf/0907.2460v3.pdf)
: [2-Categorical Logic](https://ncatlab.org/michaelshulman/show/2-categorical+logic)
: [Univalence For Elegant Reedy Presheaves](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1307.6248v2.pdf)
: [Enriched Indexed Categories](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1212.3914v3.pdf)

Jean Yves-Girard
: [Transcendental Syntax 1](http://iml.univ-mrs.fr/~girard/trsy1.pdf) [and 2](http://iml.univ-mrs.fr/~girard/trsy2.pdf)

William Lawvere
: [Some Thoughts on the Future of Category Theory](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Some+Thoughts+on+the+Future+of+Category+Theory)
: [Tools for the Advancement of Objective Logic](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Tools+for+the+advancement+of+objective+logic)
: [Diagonal Arguments and Cartesian Closed Categories](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/reprints/articles/15/tr15.pdf)

John C. Baez and James Dolan
: [Why n-Categories?](http://www.math.ucr.edu/home/baez/n_categories/why.pdf)
: [Higher Algebra: n-Categories and Algebra of Opetopes](http://arxiv.org/pdf/q-alg/9702014v1.pdf)

Robert Harper
: [Extensionality, Intensionality, and Brouwer's Dictum](https://existentialtype.wordpress.com/2012/08/11/extensionality-intensionality-and-brouwers-dictum/)
: [Constructive Mathematics is not Metamathematics](https://existentialtype.wordpress.com/2013/07/10/constructive-mathematics-is-not-meta-mathematics/)

Eugenia Cheng and Aaron Lauda
: [Higher Categories: An Illustrated Guidebook](http://www.cheng.staff.shef.ac.uk/guidebook/guidebook-new.pdf)

Tim Porter
: [S-Categories](http://arxiv.org/pdf/math/0401274v1.pdf)

Fosco Loregian
: [Coend, Cofriend] (https://arxiv.org/pdf/1501.02503v2.pdf)

W.P. Stekelenburg
: [Realizability Categories](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1301.2134v1.pdf)

Clark Barwick
: [Enriched Left Bousfield Localizations of Model Categories](http://arxiv.org/pdf/0708.2067v2.pdf)