## Definition ##

A $*$-autonomous category \[1\] is a [[symmetric monoidal
category|symmetric]] [[closed monoidal category]] $\langle
C,\otimes, I\rangle$ with a _dualizing object_: an object
$\bot$ such that the canonical morphism
$$ d_A: A \to (A \multimap \bot) \multimap \bot ,$$
which is the transpose of the evaluation map
$$ ev_{A,\bot}: (A \multimap \bot) \otimes A \to \bot ,$$
is an
isomorphism for all $A$.  (Here, $\multimap$ denotes the [[internal hom]].)

Define a functor $(-)^*=(-)\multimap\bot$.  The map $d_A$
is natural in $A$, so that there is a natural isomorphism
$d:1\Rightarrow(-)^{**}$.  We also have

$$\begin{aligned}
\hom(A\otimes B,C^*)& = \hom(A\otimes B, C\multimap\bot) \\
& \cong \hom((A\otimes B)\otimes C,\bot) \\
& \cong \hom(A\otimes(B\otimes C), \bot) \\
& \cong \hom(A,(B\otimes C)\multimap\bot) \\
& = \hom(A,(B\otimes C)^*)
\end{aligned}$$

The functor $(-)^*$, together with these two isomorphisms,
can be taken as an alternative definition of a
$*$-autonomous category.  The dualizing object $\bot$ is then defined as $I^*$.

## Examples ##

* A simple example of a $*$-autonomous category is the category of finite-dimensional [[vector space]]s over some field $k$.  In this case $k$ itself plays the role of the dualizing object, so that for an f.d. vector space $V$, $V^*$ is the usual dual space of linear maps into $k$.

* More generally, any [[compact closed category]] is $*$-autonomous with the unit $I$ as the dualizing object.

+--{: .query}
[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: Can someone fill in some examples of $*$-autonomous categories that are not compact closed?

[[Finn Lawler|Finn]]: Blute and Scott in 'Category theory for linear
logicians' (from [here](http://www.site.uottawa.ca/~phil/papers/))
give an example: reflexive topological vector spaces where the
topologies are 'linear', i.e. Hausdorff and with 0 having a
neighbourhood basis of open linear subspaces; 'reflexive' meaning that
the map $d_V$ as above is an isomorphism.  It seems this category is
$*$-autonomous but not compact.  I don't know enough topology to make
much sense of it, though.

[[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: Finn, I expect that example is in Barr's book, which would then probably have a lot of details. But I must admit I have not studied that book carefully. Also, the Chu construction was first given as an appendix to that book. 
=--

* A more interesting example of a $*$-autonomous category is the category of [[sup-lattice]]s and sup-preserving maps (= left adjoints). Clearly the poset of sup-preserving maps $hom(A, B)$ is itself a sup-lattice, so this category is closed. The free sup-lattice on a poset $X$ is the internal hom of posets $[X^{op}, \Omega]$; in particular the poset of truth values $\Omega$ is a unit for the closed structure. Define a duality $ (-)^* $ on sup-lattices, where $ X^* = X^{op} $ is the opposite poset (inf-lattices are sup-lattices), and where $ f^*: Y^* \to X^* $ is the left adjoint of $f^{op}: X^{op} \to Y^{op}$. In particular, take as dualizing object $D = \Omega^{op}$. Some simple calculations show that under the tensor product defined by the formula $ (X \multimap Y^*)^* $, the category of sup-lattices becomes a $*$-autonomous category. 

* Another interesting example is due to Yuri Manin: the category of quadratic algebras. A **quadratic algebra** over a [[field]] $k$ is a graded algebra $A = T(V)/I$, where $V$ is a finite-dimensional vector space in degree 1, $T(V)$ is the tensor algebra (the free $k$-algebra generated by $V$), and $I$ is a graded ideal generated by a subspace $R \subseteq V \otimes V$ in degree 2; so $R = I_2$, and $A$ determines the pair $(V, R)$. A morphism of quadratic algebras is a morphism of graded algebras; alternatively, a morphism $(V, R) \to (W, S)$ is a linear map $f: V \to W$ such that $(f \otimes f)(R) \subseteq S$. Define the dual $A^*$ of a quadratic algebra given by a pair $(V, R)$ to be that given by $(V^*, R^\perp)$ where $R^\perp \subseteq V^* \otimes V^*$ is the kernel of the transpose of the inclusion $i: R \subseteq V \otimes V$, i.e., there is an exact sequence 
$$0 \to R^\perp \to V^* \otimes V^* \overset{i^*}{\to} R^* \to 0$$ 
Define a tensor product by the formula 
$$(V, R) \otimes (W, S) = (V \otimes W, (1_V \otimes \sigma \otimes 1_W)(R \otimes S))$$
where $\sigma: V \otimes W \to W \otimes V$ is the symmetry. The unit is the tensor algebra on a 1-dimensional space. The hom that is adjoint to the tensor product is given by the formula $A \multimap B = (A \otimes B^*)^*$, and the result is a $*$-autonomous category. 

* In a similar vein, I am told that there is a $*$-autonomous category of quadratic operads. 

* Girard's [[coherence space]]s, developed as models of [[linear logic]], give an historically important example of a $*$-autonomous category. 

* Hyland and Ong have given a completeness theorem for multiplicative linear logic in terms of a $*$-autonomous category of _fair games_, part of a series of work on game semantics for closed category theory (compare Joyal's interpretation of Conway games as forming a compact closed category). 

* The [[Chu construction]] can be used to form many more examples of $*$-autonomous categories. 


## References ##

1. Barr, Michael, _$*$-Autonomous Categories_. LNM 752,
   Springer-Verlag 1979.

More references to come...


[[!redirects *-autonomous category]]
[[!redirects *-autonomous categories]]