pages/8/2/7/2/22728/content.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A non-associative [[group]], or a [[loop (algebra)|loop]] whose left and right [[inverses]] are the same. 

## Definition

A __nonassociative group__ is a [[unital magma]] $(G,(-)\cdot(-):G\times G\to G),1:G)$ with a unary operation called the __inverse__ $(-)^{-1}:G \to G$ such that 

* $a^{-1} \cdot a = 1$
* $a \cdot a^{-1} = 1$
* $(a \cdot b^{-1}) \cdot b = a$ 
* $(a \cdot b) \cdot b^{-1} = a$
* $b \cdot (b^{-1} \cdot a) = a$ 
* $b^{-1} \cdot (b \cdot a) = a$

for all $a,b \in G$. 

## Properties

Every non-associative group is a [[loop (algebra)|loop]] with a two-sided [[inverse]]. 

## Examples

* Every group is a nonassociative group. 

## Related concepts

* [[group]]

* [[unital magma]]

* [[invertible magma]]

* [[loop (algebra)|loop]]

* [[centipede mathematics]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 164665 Update date: 2021-05-24 20:30:41+00:00 Page name: nonassociative group

pages/8/2/7/2/22728/content.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A non-associative [[group]], or an [[invertible magma|invertible]] [[unital magma]]. Nonassociative is used in the sense of not-necessarily associative, in the same sense that a [[nonassociative algebra]] is not-necessarily associative. 

## Definition

A __nonassociative group__ is a [[unital magma]] $(G,(-)\cdot(-):G\times G\to G),1:G)$ with a unary operation called the __inverse__ $(-)^{-1}:G \to G$ such that 

* $a^{-1} \cdot a = 1$
* $a \cdot a^{-1} = 1$
* $(a \cdot b^{-1}) \cdot b = a$ 
* $(a \cdot b) \cdot b^{-1} = a$
* $b \cdot (b^{-1} \cdot a) = a$ 
* $b^{-1} \cdot (b \cdot a) = a$

for all $a,b \in G$. 

## Properties

Every non-associative group is a [[loop (algebra)|loop]] with a two-sided [[inverse]]. 

## Examples

* Every group is a nonassociative group. 

## Related concepts

* [[group]]

* [[unital magma]]

* [[invertible magma]]

* [[loop (algebra)|loop]]

* [[centipede mathematics]]
