pages/9/3/0/7/17039/content.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Mathematics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include mathematicscontents]]
=--
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


This page collects pointers related to the conference and book project:


* [[Gabriel Catren]], [[Mathieu Anel]], (eds.)
  
  \linebreak

  **New Spaces for Mathematics and Physics**

  \linebreak
  
  [conference](http://ercpqg-espace.sciencesconf.org/program) (IHP Paris, Oct-Sept 2015)

  and  

  [book project](http://ercpqg-espace.sciencesconf.org/resource/page/id/1): 

  \linebreak

  _New spaces in mathematics: formal and conceptual reflections_, 

  Cambridge University Press (2021)

  ISBN:9781108854429

  [doi:10.1017/9781108854429](https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108854429)

  [gBooks](https://books.google.us/books?id=8XUfEAAAQBAJ)

  [toc pdf](http://mathieu.anel.free.fr/mat/doc/Anel-Catren-NewSpacesTOC.pdf)

on current developments regarding foundations of [[geometry]] in [[mathematics]] and [[physics]].



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc} 


## Book 

### Volume I: New Spaces in Mathematics 

#### I.1. Differential geometry

On [[differential geometry]].

##### I.1.1 Diffeologies (Patrick Iglesias-Zemmour)

[[Patrick Iglesias-Zemmour]] on [[diffeological spaces]].

##### I.1.2 New methods for old spaces: synthetic differential geometry (Anders  Kock)

[[Anders Kock]] on [[synthetic differential geometry]].

##### I.1.3 Microlocalanalysis and beyond (Pierre Schapira)

[[Pierre Schapira]] on [[microlocal analysis]].

#### I.2. Topology and algebraic topology

On [[topology]] and [[algebraic topology]].

##### I.2.1 Topo-logie (Mathieu Anel &amp; Andr&eacute; Joyal) 

On [[Grothendieck toposes]] regarded as "[[logos|logoses]]":

* [[Mathieu Anel]], [[Andre Joyal]], _Topo-logie_ ([pdf](http://mathieu.anel.free.fr/mat/doc/Anel-Joyal-Topo-logie.pdf))

##### I.2.2 Spaces as infinity-groupoids (Timothy Porter)

[[Timothy Porter]] on [[homotopy types]] as [[infinity-groupoids]].

#####I.2.3 Homotopy type theory: the logic of space (Mike Shulman)

On [[homotopy type theory]]:

* [[Mike Shulman]], _Homotopy type theory: the logic of space_ ([arXiv:1703.03007](https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03007))


#### I.3. Algebraic geometry

On [[algebraic geometry]].

##### I.3.1 Sheaves and functors of points (Michel Vaqui&eacute;)

[[Michel Vaquié]] on [[sheaves]] and [[functorial geometry]].

##### I.3.2 Stacks (Nicole Mestrano &amp; Carlos Simpson)

[[Carlos Simpson]] on  [[algebraic stacks]].

##### I.3.3 The geometry of ambiguity – An introduction to derived geometry (Mathieu Anel)

On [[derived geometry]].

##### I.3.4 Geometry in dg-categories (Maxim Kontsevich)

[[Maxim Kontsevich]] on [[derived noncommutative geometry]] in terms of [[formal duals]] of [[dg-categories]]  ([[stable infinity-categories]], [[enhanced triangulated categories]], see also at _[[spectrum of a triangulated category]]_).


### Volume II: New Spaces in Physics

#### II.1. Non-commutative and super-commutative geometries

On [[noncommutative geometry]] and [[supergeometry]].

##### II.1.1 Noncommutative Geometry, the spectral standpoint (Alain Connes)

[[Alain Connes]] on [[spectral triple|spectral geometry]].

##### II.1.2 Topos quantum theory (Klaas Landsman)

[[Klaas Landsman]] on [[Bohr toposes]].

##### II.1.3 Super-geometry (Mikhail Kapranov)

[[Mikhail Kapranov]] on [[superalgebra]] as [[sphere spectrum]]-graded algebra (see also at _[[spectral super-scheme]]_):

* [[Mikhail Kapranov]], _Supergeometry in mathematics and physics_, in [[Gabriel Catren]], [[Mathieu Anel]], (eds.) _[[New Spaces for Mathematics and Physics]]_ ([arXiv:1512.07042](http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.07042))

* {#Kapranov15b} [[Mikhail Kapranov]], _Super-geometry_, talk at _[New Spaces for Mathematics & Physics](http://ercpqg-espace.sciencesconf.org/program)_, IHP Paris, Oct-Sept 2015 ([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bjsNwKYT8JE))


#### II.2. Symplectic geometry

On [[symplectic geometry]]:

##### II.2.1 Derived stacks in symplectic geometry (Damien Calaque)

On [[derived geometry|derived]] [[symplectic geometry]]:

* [[Damien Calaque]], _Derived stacks in symplectic geometry_ ([arXiv:1802.09643](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09643))


##### II.2.2 Higher pre-quantized geometry (Urs Schreiber)

On [[higher prequantum geometry]]:

* [[Urs Schreiber]], _[[schreiber:Higher Prequantum Geometry]],([arXiv:1601.05956](http://arxiv.org/abs/1601.05956), [video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EaYMuyr9KII))


#### II.3. Space-time

On [[spacetime]].

##### II.3.1 Struggles with the continuum (John Baez)

On the [[continuum]]:

* [[John Baez]], _Struggles with the continuum_ ([arXiv:1609.01421](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.01421))

##### II.3.2 Twistor theory (Roger Penrose)

[[Roger Penrose]] on [[twistors]].

##### II.3.3 Loop quantum gravity (Muxin Han)


##### II.3.4 Stringy geometry and emergent space (Marcos Mari&ntilde;o)

[[Marcos Mariño]] on [[AdS-CFT duality]].

\linebreak

## Conference
### Smoothness and singularities 

#### Schemes (Pierre Cartier)

[[Pierre Cartier]] on [[schemes]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=etdvnswIhMw))

#### Synthetic differential geometry - new methods for old spaces (Anders Kock)
 {#Kock}

[[Anders Kock]] on [[synthetic differential geometry]]

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AXz7xu3WrPE))

#### Lie (or differentiable) groupoids (Jean Pradines)

[[Jean Pradines]] on [[Lie groupoids]]

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sg_dStsGcIw))

#### Diffeologies (Patrick Iglesias-Zemmour)
 {#IglesiasZemmour}
 
[[Patrick Iglesias-Zemmour]] on [[diffeological spaces]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4sZDmiVOhaA))

(lecture notes [pdf](http://math.huji.ac.il/~piz/documents/AITD.pdf))

### Spaces with categories of points

#### Geometric aspects of topos theory in relation with logical doctrines (Andr&#233; Joyal)

[[André Joyal]] on [[topos theory]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kaZpOEOAUzE))

#### Sheaves and functors of points (Michel Vaqui&#233;)

[[Michel Vaquié]] on [[sheaves]] and [[gros toposes]].


#### Stacks and the Artin property (Carlos Simpson)
 {#Simpson}

[[Carlos Simpson]] on [[algebraic stacks]] and the [[Artin representability theorem]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vI-09KIkBbY))

#### The Geometry of Ambiguity: An introduction to the ideas of Derived Geometry (Mathieu Anel)
 {#Anel}

[[Mathieu Anel]] on [[derived geometry]] ([pdf](http://mathieu.anel.free.fr/mat/doc/Anel-DerivedGeometry.pdf))

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=198ssqlW9BI))

### Non-commutative geometry


#### Geometry in triangulated categories (Maxim Kontsevich)
 {#Kontsevich}

[[Maxim Kontsevich]] on [[derived noncommutative geometry]] in terms of [[formal duals]] of [[stable infinity-categories]] ([[enhanced triangulated categories]], see also at _[[spectrum of a triangulated category]]_).

* [[Maxim Kontsevich]], _Geometry in triangulated categories_, talk at _[[New Spaces for Mathematics and Physics]]_, IHP Paris, Oct-Sept 2015 ([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XnmO9RAbl50))


#### Quantum differential geometry (Shahn Majid)
 
[[Shahn Majid]] on [[noncommutative geometry]]

### Spaces up to homotopy
#### Spaces as infinity-groupoids (Timothy Porter)

[[Timothy Porter]] on thinking of spaces as infinity groupoids and the relation with the [[homotopy hypothesis]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BH_NwgM8QjI))  ([[Spaces as infinity-groupoids.pdf|draft of article:file]])

#### Homological decomposition and motives (Denis-Charles Cisinski)

[[Denis-Charles Cisinski]] on [[motives]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GhcxtwUJ0TY))

#### Homotopy type theory: the logic of space (Mike Shulman)
  {#Shulman}

On [[homotopy type theory]]

* [[Mike Shulman]], _Homotopy type theory: the logic of space_ ([arXiv:1703.03007](https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03007))


### Spaces in classical & quantum mechanics

#### Derived stacks in symplectic geometry (Damien Calaque)
 {#Calaque}

* [[Damien Calaque]] on [[derived geometry|derived]] [[symplectic geometry]]:

* [[Damien Calaque]], _Derived stacks in symplectic geometry_ ([arXiv:1802.09643](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09643))


#### Higher pre-quantized geometry (Urs Schreiber)
 {#Schreiber}

* [[Urs Schreiber]], _[[schreiber:Higher Prequantum Geometry]],([arXiv:1601.05956](http://arxiv.org/abs/1601.05956), [video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EaYMuyr9KII))




### Spaces in quantum gravity

#### Spin networks and spinfoams (Hanno Sahlmann)

Hanno Sahlmann on spin networks.

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QDU46lK1FDU))


#### Super-geometry (Mikhail Kapranov)
 {#Kapranov}

[[Mikhail Kapranov]] on [[superalgebra]] as [[sphere spectrum]]-graded algebra (see also at _[[spectral super-scheme]]).

* [[Mikhail Kapranov]], _Supergeometry in mathematics and physics_, in [[Gabriel Catren]], [[Mathieu Anel]], (eds.) _[[New Spaces for Mathematics and Physics]]_ ([arXiv:1512.07042](http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.07042))

* {#Kapranov15b} [[Mikhail Kapranov]], _Super-geometry_, talk at _[New Spaces for Mathematics & Physics](http://ercpqg-espace.sciencesconf.org/program)_, IHP Paris, Oct-Sept 2015 ([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bjsNwKYT8JE))

#### Twistor theory (Roger Penrose)
 {#Penrose}

[[Roger Penrose]] on [[twistors]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kmYfYOW0vSg))


#### Stringy geometry and emergent space (Marcos Mari&#241;o) 
 
[[Marcos Mariño]] on [[AdS-CFT]]

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MD_jj3O6IRE))





category: reference

Commit message:

Revision ID: 161653 Update date: 2021-03-23 12:37:37+00:00 Page name: New Spaces for Mathematics and Physics

pages/9/3/0/7/17039/content.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Mathematics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include mathematicscontents]]
=--
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


This page collects pointers related to the conference and book project:


* [[Gabriel Catren]], [[Mathieu Anel]], (eds.)
  
  \linebreak

  **New Spaces for Mathematics and Physics**

  \linebreak
  
  [conference](http://ercpqg-espace.sciencesconf.org/program) (IHP Paris, Oct-Sept 2015)

  and  

  [book project](http://ercpqg-espace.sciencesconf.org/resource/page/id/1): 

  \linebreak

  _New spaces in mathematics: formal and conceptual reflections_, 

  Cambridge University Press (2021)

  ISBN:9781108854429

  [doi:10.1017/9781108854429](https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108854429)

  [gBooks](https://books.google.us/books?id=8XUfEAAAQBAJ)

  [toc pdf](http://mathieu.anel.free.fr/mat/doc/Anel-Catren-NewSpacesTOC.pdf)

on current developments regarding foundations of [[geometry]] in [[mathematics]] and [[physics]].



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc} 


## Book 

### Volume I: New Spaces in Mathematics 

#### I.1. Differential geometry

On [[differential geometry]].

##### I.1.1 Diffeologies (Patrick Iglesias-Zemmour)

[[Patrick Iglesias-Zemmour]] on [[diffeological spaces]].

##### I.1.2 New methods for old spaces: synthetic differential geometry (Anders  Kock)

* [[Anders Kock]], _New methods for old spaces: [[synthetic differential geometry]]_ 
([arXiv:1610.00286](https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.00286))

##### I.1.3 Microlocalanalysis and beyond (Pierre Schapira)

[[Pierre Schapira]] on [[microlocal analysis]].

#### I.2. Topology and algebraic topology

On [[topology]] and [[algebraic topology]].

##### I.2.1 Topo-logie (Mathieu Anel &amp; Andr&eacute; Joyal) 

On [[Grothendieck toposes]] regarded as "[[logos|logoses]]":

* [[Mathieu Anel]], [[Andre Joyal]], _Topo-logie_ ([pdf](http://mathieu.anel.free.fr/mat/doc/Anel-Joyal-Topo-logie.pdf))

##### I.2.2 Spaces as infinity-groupoids (Timothy Porter)

* [[Timothy Porter]], _Spaces as infinity-groupoids_ ([preprint pdf](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/Spaces+as+infinity-groupoids.pdf)): on [[homotopy types]] as [[infinity-groupoids]].

#####I.2.3 Homotopy type theory: the logic of space (Mike Shulman)

On [[homotopy type theory]]:

* [[Mike Shulman]], _Homotopy type theory: the logic of space_ ([arXiv:1703.03007](https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03007))


#### I.3. Algebraic geometry

On [[algebraic geometry]].

##### I.3.1 Sheaves and functors of points (Michel Vaqui&eacute;)

[[Michel Vaquié]] on [[sheaves]] and [[functorial geometry]].

##### I.3.2 Stacks (Nicole Mestrano &amp; Carlos Simpson)

[[Carlos Simpson]] on  [[algebraic stacks]].

##### I.3.3 The geometry of ambiguity – An introduction to derived geometry (Mathieu Anel)

On [[derived geometry]].

##### I.3.4 Geometry in dg-categories (Maxim Kontsevich)

[[Maxim Kontsevich]] on [[derived noncommutative geometry]] in terms of [[formal duals]] of [[dg-categories]]  ([[stable infinity-categories]], [[enhanced triangulated categories]], see also at _[[spectrum of a triangulated category]]_).


### Volume II: New Spaces in Physics

#### II.1. Non-commutative and super-commutative geometries

On [[noncommutative geometry]] and [[supergeometry]].

##### II.1.1 Noncommutative Geometry, the spectral standpoint (Alain Connes)

[[Alain Connes]] on [[spectral triple|spectral geometry]].

##### II.1.2 Topos quantum theory (Klaas Landsman)

[[Klaas Landsman]] on [[Bohr toposes]].

##### II.1.3 Super-geometry (Mikhail Kapranov)

[[Mikhail Kapranov]] on [[superalgebra]] as [[sphere spectrum]]-graded algebra (see also at _[[spectral super-scheme]]_):

* [[Mikhail Kapranov]], _Supergeometry in mathematics and physics_, in [[Gabriel Catren]], [[Mathieu Anel]], (eds.) _[[New Spaces for Mathematics and Physics]]_ ([arXiv:1512.07042](http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.07042))

* {#Kapranov15b} [[Mikhail Kapranov]], _Super-geometry_, talk at _[New Spaces for Mathematics & Physics](http://ercpqg-espace.sciencesconf.org/program)_, IHP Paris, Oct-Sept 2015 ([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bjsNwKYT8JE))


#### II.2. Symplectic geometry

On [[symplectic geometry]]:

##### II.2.1 Derived stacks in symplectic geometry (Damien Calaque)

On [[derived geometry|derived]] [[symplectic geometry]]:

* [[Damien Calaque]], _Derived stacks in symplectic geometry_ ([arXiv:1802.09643](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09643))


##### II.2.2 Higher pre-quantized geometry (Urs Schreiber)

On [[higher prequantum geometry]]:

* [[Urs Schreiber]], _[[schreiber:Higher Prequantum Geometry]],([arXiv:1601.05956](http://arxiv.org/abs/1601.05956), [video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EaYMuyr9KII))


#### II.3. Space-time

On [[spacetime]].

##### II.3.1 Struggles with the continuum (John Baez)

On the [[continuum]]:

* [[John Baez]], _Struggles with the continuum_ ([arXiv:1609.01421](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.01421))

##### II.3.2 Twistor theory (Roger Penrose)

[[Roger Penrose]] on [[twistors]].

##### II.3.3 Loop quantum gravity (Muxin Han)


##### II.3.4 Stringy geometry and emergent space (Marcos Mari&ntilde;o)

[[Marcos Mariño]] on [[AdS-CFT duality]].

\linebreak

## Conference
### Smoothness and singularities 

#### Schemes (Pierre Cartier)

[[Pierre Cartier]] on [[schemes]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=etdvnswIhMw))

#### Synthetic differential geometry - new methods for old spaces (Anders Kock)
 {#Kock}

[[Anders Kock]] on [[synthetic differential geometry]]

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AXz7xu3WrPE))

#### Lie (or differentiable) groupoids (Jean Pradines)

[[Jean Pradines]] on [[Lie groupoids]]

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sg_dStsGcIw))

#### Diffeologies (Patrick Iglesias-Zemmour)
 {#IglesiasZemmour}
 
[[Patrick Iglesias-Zemmour]] on [[diffeological spaces]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4sZDmiVOhaA))

(lecture notes [pdf](http://math.huji.ac.il/~piz/documents/AITD.pdf))

### Spaces with categories of points

#### Geometric aspects of topos theory in relation with logical doctrines (Andr&#233; Joyal)

[[André Joyal]] on [[topos theory]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kaZpOEOAUzE))

#### Sheaves and functors of points (Michel Vaqui&#233;)

[[Michel Vaquié]] on [[sheaves]] and [[gros toposes]].


#### Stacks and the Artin property (Carlos Simpson)
 {#Simpson}

[[Carlos Simpson]] on [[algebraic stacks]] and the [[Artin representability theorem]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vI-09KIkBbY))

#### The Geometry of Ambiguity: An introduction to the ideas of Derived Geometry (Mathieu Anel)
 {#Anel}

[[Mathieu Anel]] on [[derived geometry]] ([pdf](http://mathieu.anel.free.fr/mat/doc/Anel-DerivedGeometry.pdf))

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=198ssqlW9BI))

### Non-commutative geometry


#### Geometry in triangulated categories (Maxim Kontsevich)
 {#Kontsevich}

[[Maxim Kontsevich]] on [[derived noncommutative geometry]] in terms of [[formal duals]] of [[stable infinity-categories]] ([[enhanced triangulated categories]], see also at _[[spectrum of a triangulated category]]_).

* [[Maxim Kontsevich]], _Geometry in triangulated categories_, talk at _[[New Spaces for Mathematics and Physics]]_, IHP Paris, Oct-Sept 2015 ([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XnmO9RAbl50))


#### Quantum differential geometry (Shahn Majid)
 
[[Shahn Majid]] on [[noncommutative geometry]]

### Spaces up to homotopy
#### Spaces as infinity-groupoids (Timothy Porter)

[[Timothy Porter]] on thinking of spaces as infinity groupoids and the relation with the [[homotopy hypothesis]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BH_NwgM8QjI))  ([[Spaces as infinity-groupoids.pdf|draft of article:file]])

#### Homological decomposition and motives (Denis-Charles Cisinski)

[[Denis-Charles Cisinski]] on [[motives]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GhcxtwUJ0TY))

#### Homotopy type theory: the logic of space (Mike Shulman)
  {#Shulman}

On [[homotopy type theory]]

* [[Mike Shulman]], _Homotopy type theory: the logic of space_ ([arXiv:1703.03007](https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03007))


### Spaces in classical & quantum mechanics

#### Derived stacks in symplectic geometry (Damien Calaque)
 {#Calaque}

* [[Damien Calaque]] on [[derived geometry|derived]] [[symplectic geometry]]:

* [[Damien Calaque]], _Derived stacks in symplectic geometry_ ([arXiv:1802.09643](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09643))


#### Higher pre-quantized geometry (Urs Schreiber)
 {#Schreiber}

* [[Urs Schreiber]], _[[schreiber:Higher Prequantum Geometry]],([arXiv:1601.05956](http://arxiv.org/abs/1601.05956), [video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EaYMuyr9KII))




### Spaces in quantum gravity

#### Spin networks and spinfoams (Hanno Sahlmann)

Hanno Sahlmann on spin networks.

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QDU46lK1FDU))


#### Super-geometry (Mikhail Kapranov)
 {#Kapranov}

[[Mikhail Kapranov]] on [[superalgebra]] as [[sphere spectrum]]-graded algebra (see also at _[[spectral super-scheme]]).

* [[Mikhail Kapranov]], _Supergeometry in mathematics and physics_, in [[Gabriel Catren]], [[Mathieu Anel]], (eds.) _[[New Spaces for Mathematics and Physics]]_ ([arXiv:1512.07042](http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.07042))

* {#Kapranov15b} [[Mikhail Kapranov]], _Super-geometry_, talk at _[New Spaces for Mathematics & Physics](http://ercpqg-espace.sciencesconf.org/program)_, IHP Paris, Oct-Sept 2015 ([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bjsNwKYT8JE))

#### Twistor theory (Roger Penrose)
 {#Penrose}

[[Roger Penrose]] on [[twistors]].

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kmYfYOW0vSg))


#### Stringy geometry and emergent space (Marcos Mari&#241;o) 
 
[[Marcos Mariño]] on [[AdS-CFT]]

([video recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MD_jj3O6IRE))





category: reference
