Consider a finite dimensional semisimple complex Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}$ with the Cartan subalgebra $\mathfrak{h}$. 
Choose a positive root system. Let $P^+\subset \mathfrak{h}^*$ be the set of dominate integral weights. For every $\lambda\in P^+$ consider the corresponding finite dimensional left $U(\mathfrak{g})$-module $L(\lambda)$. Certain resolutions of $L(\lambda)$ are defined in a series of papers of Bernstein, Gel'fand and Gel'fand and are now called BGG resolutions. There are also generalizations, e.g. for Kac-Moody algebras.

* [[eom]]: Alvany Rocha, [BGG resolution](http://www.encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php?title=BGG_resolution&oldid=14028)

* I.N. Bernstein, [[I. M. Gelfand]], S. I. Gelfand, _Structure of representations generated by vectors of highest weight_, Funkts. Anal. Prilozh. __5__: 1 (1971) pp. 1&#8211;9; _A certain category of -modules_, Funkts. Anal. Prilozh. __10__: 2 (1976) pp. 1&#8211;8; _Differential operators on the base affine space and a study of $\mathfrak{g}$-modules), I.M. Gelfand (ed.), Lie groups and their representations, Proc. Summer School on Group Representations, Janos Bolyai Math. Soc.& Wiley (1975) pp. 39&#8211;64

* M. Falk, V. Schechtman, A. Varchenko, _BGG resolutions via configuration spaces_, [arxiv/1309.7811](http://arxiv.org/abs/1309.7811)

> We study the blow-ups of configuration spaces. These spaces have a structure of what we call an Orlik-Solomon manifold; it allows us to compute the intersection cohomology of certain flat connections with logarithmic singularities using some Aomoto type complexes of logarithmic forms. Using this construction we realize geometrically the $sl_2$ Bernstein - Gelfand - Gelfand resolution as an Aomoto complex. 

* Sergey Arkhipov, _A new construction of the semi-infinite BGG resolution_, [q-alg/9605043](http://arxiv.org/abs/q-alg/9605043)

category: representation theory

[[!redirects BGG resolutions]]