pages/8/0/8/6/6808/content.md, before:


* [wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_Banks_%28physicist%29)

## Selected writings

On [[string phenomenology]] via [[D=2 N=(2,0) SCFT]]:

* {#BDFF88} [[Tom Banks]], [[Lance Dixon]], [[Dan Friedan]], [[Emil Martinec]], _Phenomenology and Conformal Field Theory or Can String Theory Predict the Weak Mixing Angle?_, Nucl. Phys. B299 (1988) 613.  ([pdf](http://www.slac.stanford.edu/cgi-wrap/getdoc/slac-pub-4377.pdf))

On the [[AdS/CFT correspondence]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], [[Michael Douglas]], [[Gary Horowitz]], [[Emil Martinec]], _AdS Dynamics from Conformal Field Theory_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9808016](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9808016), [spire:474214](http://inspirehep.net/record/474214))


On the [[BFSS matrix model]] ([[M-theory]] as [[D0-brane]] [[quantum mechanics]] in [[non-perturbative effect|non-perturbative]] [[type IIA string theory]]):

* {#BanksFischlerShenkerSusskind96} [[Tom Banks]], [[Willy Fischler]], [[Stephen Shenker]], [[Leonard Susskind]], _M Theory As A Matrix Model: A Conjecture_  Phys. Rev. D55 (1997). ([arXiv:hep-th/9610043](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9610043))

* [[Tom Banks]], _Matrix Theory_, Nucl.Phys.Proc.Suppl. 67 (1998) 180-224 ([arXiv:hep-th/9710231](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9710231))

Discussion of longitudinal [[M5-branes]] in the [[BFSS matrix model]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], [[Nathan Seiberg]], [[Stephen Shenker]], _Branes from Matrices_, Nucl. Phys. B490:91-106, 1997 ([arXiv:hep-th/9612157](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9612157))

On [[black holes in string theory]] via the [[BFSS matrix model]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], [[Willy Fischler]], [[Igor Klebanov]], [[Leonard Susskind]],  _Schwarzschild Black Holes from Matrix Theory_, Phys.Rev.Lett.80:226-229,1998 ([arXiv:hep-th/9709091](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9709091))

* [[Tom Banks]], [[Willy Fischler]], [[Igor Klebanov]], [[Leonard Susskind]], _Schwarzchild Black Holes in Matrix Theory II_, JHEP 9801:008,1998 ([arXiv:hep-th/9711005](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9711005))  


On [[massive type IIA string theory]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], K. van den Broek, _Massive IIA flux compactifications and U-dualities_, JHEP 0703:068, 2007 ([arXiv:hep-th/0611185](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0611185))


On the [[firewall problem]] via the [[BFSS matrix model]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], [[Willy Fischler]], _No Firewalls in Holographic Space-Time or Matrix Theory_ 2013 ([arXiv:1305.3923](http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.3923))

On [[D=4 N=8 supergravity]]:

 * [[Tom Banks]], _Why I don't Believe N=8 SUGRA is Finite_, talk at _[Workshop "Supergravity versus Superstring Theory in the Ultraviolet"](http://www.gravity.psu.edu/events/supergravity/program.shtml)_, PennState Univ, PA USA, August 27-30 2009.


On [[quantum field theory]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], _Modern quantum field theory, A concise introduction_ ([pdf](http://web.phys.ntnu.no/~mika/banks.pdf))

On the [[landscape of string theory vacua]] (or not):

* [[Tom Banks]], _Landskepticism: or Why Effective Potentials Don't Count String Models_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0412129](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0412129))

* [[Tom Banks]], _The Top $10^{500}$ Reasons Not to Believe in the Landscape_ ([arXiv:1208.5715](https://arxiv.org/abs/1208.5715))

Specifically on the [[swampland conjectures]]/[[landscape of string theory vacua]] in view of [[non-perturbative effects]] in [[string theory]] (i.e. in [[M-theory]]):

* [[Tom Banks]], _The Top $10^{500}$ Reasons Not to Believe in the Landscape_ ([arXiv:1208.5715](https://arxiv.org/abs/1208.5715))

* {#Banks19} [[Tom Banks]], _On the Limits of Effective Quantum Field Theory: Eternal Inflation, Landscapes, and Other Mythical Beasts_ ([arxiv:1910.12817](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.12817))

  from pages 14-22:

  > these considerations lead to conclusions at odds with the seemingly similar arguments of $[$ the [[swampland conjectures]] $]$. $[\cdots]$  Perturbative moduli space completely distorts the true nature of the class of consistent models.

  > It’s important to realize that the entire procedure just outlined for finding (meta) stable AdS minima of a non-perturbative effective potential is purely hypothetical and has no basis in well founded string theory calculations. $[\cdots].$ 

  > The hypothesis of the String Landscape is entirely based on low energy effective field theory ideas about finding "vacua" by minimizing an effective potential.  Everything that’s been said above indicates that this idea has no validity in genuine models of quantum gravity. $[\cdots]$

  > The most serious issue,  in  my  opinion,  is  the  contention  that  one  can  make  the  AdS  radius  much  larger  than the size of the compact manifold.  All well established examples of large radius AdS/CFT havea compact manifold of dimension 2 or greater whose radius is comparable to that of the AdSspace.  In Appendix A we’ll present an argument based on the properties of AdS black holes,that this is in fact necessary.

  > The next step in the construction of "realistic" models involves "adding an anti-brane to break supersymmetry and make the c.c.  positive".  This is supposed to be a small modification of the model, calculable in low energy effective field theory, and that seems manifestly incorrect. $[\cdots]$.

  > even if one believes that the construction of meta-stable dS models is reliable, there is no clear argument about  what  the  proper  observables  of  the  model  are  nor  that different  dS  constructions are part of the same model.  Neither is there an interpretation of these correlators as transition amplitudes in a quantum mechanical model. $[\cdots]$

  > The conclusion  that  effective  field  theorists  should  draw  from  this is that unlike super-symmetric string models in flat or AdS space-time, many of which have at least perturbative definitions as mathematical models obeying the axioms of quantum mechanics, all literature on the String Landscape is speculation based on the unfounded notion that all string models with a given amount of SUSY are part of one single model and that it makes sense to define an effective action that encompasses all string models. Every single non-perturbative construction of string models contradicts this claim $[\cdots]$

category: people

Commit message:

Revision ID: 163546 Update date: 2021-05-06 15:06:18+00:00 Page name: Tom Banks

pages/8/0/8/6/6808/content.md, after:


* [wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_Banks_%28physicist%29)

## Selected writings

On [[string phenomenology]] via [[D=2 N=(2,0) SCFT]]:

* {#BDFF88} [[Tom Banks]], [[Lance Dixon]], [[Dan Friedan]], [[Emil Martinec]], _Phenomenology and Conformal Field Theory or Can String Theory Predict the Weak Mixing Angle?_, Nucl. Phys. B299 (1988) 613.  ([pdf](http://www.slac.stanford.edu/cgi-wrap/getdoc/slac-pub-4377.pdf))

On the [[AdS/CFT correspondence]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], [[Michael Douglas]], [[Gary Horowitz]], [[Emil Martinec]], _AdS Dynamics from Conformal Field Theory_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9808016](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9808016), [spire:474214](http://inspirehep.net/record/474214))


On the [[BFSS matrix model]] ([[M-theory]] as [[D0-brane]] [[quantum mechanics]] in [[non-perturbative effect|non-perturbative]] [[type IIA string theory]]):

* {#BanksFischlerShenkerSusskind96} [[Tom Banks]], [[Willy Fischler]], [[Stephen Shenker]], [[Leonard Susskind]], _M Theory As A Matrix Model: A Conjecture_  Phys. Rev. D55 (1997). ([arXiv:hep-th/9610043](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9610043))

* [[Tom Banks]], _Matrix Theory_, Nucl.Phys.Proc.Suppl. 67 (1998) 180-224 ([arXiv:hep-th/9710231](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9710231))

Discussion of longitudinal [[M5-branes]] in the [[BFSS matrix model]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], [[Nathan Seiberg]], [[Stephen Shenker]], _Branes from Matrices_, Nucl. Phys. B490:91-106, 1997 ([arXiv:hep-th/9612157](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9612157))

On [[black holes in string theory]] via the [[BFSS matrix model]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], [[Willy Fischler]], [[Igor Klebanov]], [[Leonard Susskind]],  _Schwarzschild Black Holes from Matrix Theory_, Phys.Rev.Lett.80:226-229,1998 ([arXiv:hep-th/9709091](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9709091))

* [[Tom Banks]], [[Willy Fischler]], [[Igor Klebanov]], [[Leonard Susskind]], _Schwarzchild Black Holes in Matrix Theory II_, JHEP 9801:008,1998 ([arXiv:hep-th/9711005](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9711005))  


On [[massive type IIA string theory]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], K. van den Broek, _Massive IIA flux compactifications and U-dualities_, JHEP 0703:068, 2007 ([arXiv:hep-th/0611185](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0611185))


On the [[firewall problem]] via the [[BFSS matrix model]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], [[Willy Fischler]], _No Firewalls in Holographic Space-Time or Matrix Theory_ 2013 ([arXiv:1305.3923](http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.3923))

On [[D=4 N=8 supergravity]]:

 * [[Tom Banks]], _Why I don't Believe N=8 SUGRA is Finite_, talk at _[Workshop "Supergravity versus Superstring Theory in the Ultraviolet"](http://www.gravity.psu.edu/events/supergravity/program.shtml)_, PennState Univ, PA USA, August 27-30 2009.


On [[quantum field theory]]:

* [[Tom Banks]], _Modern quantum field theory, A concise introduction_ ([pdf](http://web.phys.ntnu.no/~mika/banks.pdf))

On the [[landscape of string theory vacua]] (or not):

* [[Tom Banks]], _Landskepticism: or Why Effective Potentials Don't Count String Models_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0412129](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0412129))

* [[Tom Banks]], _The Top $10^{500}$ Reasons Not to Believe in the Landscape_ ([arXiv:1208.5715](https://arxiv.org/abs/1208.5715))

Specifically on the [[swampland conjectures]]/[[landscape of string theory vacua]] in view of [[non-perturbative effects]] in [[string theory]] (i.e. in [[M-theory]]):

* [[Tom Banks]], _The Top $10^{500}$ Reasons Not to Believe in the Landscape_ ([arXiv:1208.5715](https://arxiv.org/abs/1208.5715))

* {#Banks19} [[Tom Banks]], _On the Limits of Effective Quantum Field Theory: Eternal Inflation, Landscapes, and Other Mythical Beasts_ ([arxiv:1910.12817](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.12817))

  from pages 14-22:

  > these considerations lead to conclusions at odds with the seemingly similar arguments of $[$ the [[swampland conjectures]] $]$. $[\cdots]$  Perturbative moduli space completely distorts the true nature of the class of consistent models.

  > It’s important to realize that the entire procedure just outlined for finding (meta) stable AdS minima of a non-perturbative effective potential is purely hypothetical and has no basis in well founded string theory calculations. $[\cdots].$ 

  > The hypothesis of the String Landscape is entirely based on low energy effective field theory ideas about finding "vacua" by minimizing an effective potential.  Everything that’s been said above indicates that this idea has no validity in genuine models of quantum gravity. $[\cdots]$

  > The most serious issue,  in  my  opinion,  is  the  contention  that  one  can  make  the  AdS  radius  much  larger  than the size of the compact manifold.  All well established examples of large radius AdS/CFT havea compact manifold of dimension 2 or greater whose radius is comparable to that of the AdSspace.  In Appendix A we’ll present an argument based on the properties of AdS black holes,that this is in fact necessary.

  > The next step in the construction of "realistic" models involves "adding an anti-brane to break supersymmetry and make the c.c.  positive".  This is supposed to be a small modification of the model, calculable in low energy effective field theory, and that seems manifestly incorrect. $[\cdots]$.

  > even if one believes that the construction of meta-stable dS models is reliable, there is no clear argument about  what  the  proper  observables  of  the  model  are  nor  that different  dS  constructions are part of the same model.  Neither is there an interpretation of these correlators as transition amplitudes in a quantum mechanical model. $[\cdots]$

  > The conclusion  that  effective  field  theorists  should  draw  from  this is that unlike super-symmetric string models in flat or AdS space-time, many of which have at least perturbative definitions as mathematical models obeying the axioms of quantum mechanics, all literature on the String Landscape is speculation based on the unfounded notion that all string models with a given amount of SUSY are part of one single model and that it makes sense to define an effective action that encompasses all string models. Every single non-perturbative construction of string models contradicts this claim $[\cdots]$

Musings on [[holography]] and  and [[quantum information]] (such as through [[holographic entanglement entropy]]):

* [[Tom Banks]], *Holographic Space-time and Quantum Information* ([arXiv:2001.08205](https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08205))





category: people
