pages/8/4/1/9/9148/content.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebraic Quantum Field Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include AQFT and operator algebra contents]]
=--
#### Functorial Quantum field theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functorial quantum field theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Ising model_ is a simple [[lattice model|lattice]] [[model (in theoretical physics)]] of [[physical systems]] roughly similar to ferromagnets. Its configurations are functions on a lattice with values in $\{-1,+1\}$, roughly to be thought of as the magnetic polarizations of elementary magnets in a crystal lattice.

The Ising model gained importance as a toy model in theoretical [[physics]]. It is about the simplest possible model that allows methods of [[Euclidean field theory|Euclidean]] [[quantum field theory]] in [[statistical physics]] and the study of [[critical phenomena]]. In fact at a critical [[temperature]] and in [[dimension]] 2 the model exibits the behaviour of a [[2d CFT|2d]][[conformal field theory]], one of the examples of [[rational conformal field theory]].

Real-world [[physical systems]] that show behaviour described by the Ising model were only found later ([Wolf](#Wolf)).

## Properties

* [[2d CFT]]

* [[Kramers-Wannier duality]]

## Related concepts

* [[Euclidean field theory]]

* [[Potts model]]

* [[Gepner model]]

## References

* {#PeetersZamaklar09} [[Kasper Peeters]], [[Marija Zamaklar]], section 2.1 of _Euclidean Field Theory_, Lecture notes 2009-2011 ([web](http://maths.dur.ac.uk/users/kasper.peeters/eft.html), [pdf](http://maths.dur.ac.uk/users/kasper.peeters/pdf/eft.pdf))


* {#Wolf} W. P. Wolf, _The Ising model and real magnetic materials_, Braz. J. Phys. vol.30 no.4 S&#227;o Paulo Dec. 2000 ([web](http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=s0103-97332000000400030))

See also

* Wikipedia, _[Ising model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ising_model)_

Discussion of the [[Ising model]] [[2d CFT]] as a boundary theory to a 3d [[TQFT]] based on the [[Turaev-Viro model]], similar to the [[CS-WZW correspondence]], and the phenomenon of [[Kramers-Wannier duality]], is in:


* [[Jürg Fröhlich]], [[Jürgen Fuchs]], [[Ingo Runkel]], [[Christoph Schweigert]], _Kramers-Wannier duality from conformal defects_ ([arXiv:cond-mat/0404051](http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0404051))

(via [[FRS-formalism]]) and also in

* {#FreedTeleman18} [[Daniel Freed]], [[Constantin Teleman]], _Topological dualities in the Ising model_ ([arXiv:1806.00008](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.00008))

3d version:

* {#Behan18} Connor Behan, _Bootstrapping the long-range Ising model in three dimensions_,  Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, Volume 52, Number 7 ([arXiv:1810.07199](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.07199), [doi:10.1088/1751-8121/aafd1b](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1751-8121/aafd1b))
 

[[!redirects Ising models]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 161850 Update date: 2021-03-29 04:37:35+00:00 Page name: Ising model

pages/8/4/1/9/9148/content.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebraic Quantum Field Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include AQFT and operator algebra contents]]
=--
#### Functorial Quantum field theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functorial quantum field theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Ising model_ is a simple [[lattice model|lattice]] [[model (in theoretical physics)]] of [[physical systems]] roughly similar to ferromagnets. Its configurations are functions on a lattice with values in $\{-1,+1\}$, roughly to be thought of as the magnetic polarizations of elementary magnets in a crystal lattice.

The Ising model gained importance as a toy model in theoretical [[physics]]. It is about the simplest possible model that allows methods of [[Euclidean field theory|Euclidean]] [[quantum field theory]] in [[statistical physics]] and the study of [[critical phenomena]]. In fact at a critical [[temperature]] and in [[dimension]] 2 the model exibits the behaviour of a [[2d CFT|2d]][[conformal field theory]], one of the examples of [[rational conformal field theory]].

Real-world [[physical systems]] that show behaviour described by the Ising model were only found later ([Wolf](#Wolf)).

## Properties

* [[2d CFT]]

* [[Kramers-Wannier duality]]

## Related concepts

* [[Euclidean field theory]]

* [[Potts model]]

* [[Gepner model]]

## References

Original articles:

* {#Wegner71} [[Franz Wegner]], _Duality in Generalized Ising Models and Phase Transitions without Local Order Parameters_, Journal of Mathematical Physics 12, 2259 (1971) ([doi:10.1063/1.1665530](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1665530))

  > (introducing the idea of [[lattice QCD]])


(...)


Review:


* {#PeetersZamaklar09} [[Kasper Peeters]], [[Marija Zamaklar]], section 2.1 of _Euclidean Field Theory_, Lecture notes 2009-2011 ([web](http://maths.dur.ac.uk/users/kasper.peeters/eft.html), [pdf](http://maths.dur.ac.uk/users/kasper.peeters/pdf/eft.pdf))


* {#Wolf} W. P. Wolf, _The Ising model and real magnetic materials_, Braz. J. Phys. vol.30 no.4 S&#227;o Paulo Dec. 2000 ([web](http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=s0103-97332000000400030))

See also

* Wikipedia, _[Ising model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ising_model)_

Discussion of the [[Ising model]] [[2d CFT]] as a boundary theory to a 3d [[TQFT]] based on the [[Turaev-Viro model]], similar to the [[CS-WZW correspondence]], and the phenomenon of [[Kramers-Wannier duality]], is in:


* [[Jürg Fröhlich]], [[Jürgen Fuchs]], [[Ingo Runkel]], [[Christoph Schweigert]], _Kramers-Wannier duality from conformal defects_ ([arXiv:cond-mat/0404051](http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0404051))

(via [[FRS-formalism]]) and also in

* {#FreedTeleman18} [[Daniel Freed]], [[Constantin Teleman]], _Topological dualities in the Ising model_ ([arXiv:1806.00008](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.00008))

3d version:

* {#Behan18} Connor Behan, _Bootstrapping the long-range Ising model in three dimensions_,  Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, Volume 52, Number 7 ([arXiv:1810.07199](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.07199), [doi:10.1088/1751-8121/aafd1b](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1751-8121/aafd1b))
 

[[!redirects Ising models]]
