<div class="rightHandSide toc">
[[!include category theory - contents]]
</div>

#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea and motivation ##

A _locale_ is, intuitively, like a [[topological space]] that may or may not have enough points (or even any points at all).  It contains things we call "open sets" but there may or may not be enough points to distinguish between open sets.  An "open set" in a locale can be regarded as conveying a bounded amount of information about the (hypothetical) points that it contains.  For example, there is a locale of all surjections from the natural numbers $N$ to the real numbers $R$.  It has no points, since there are no such surjections, but it contains many nontrivial "open sets;" these open sets are generated by a family parametrised by $n: N$ and $x: R$ that may be described as $\{f:N\to R | f$ is a surjection and  $f(n) = x\}$.

Every topological space can be regarded as a locale (with a little bit of lost information if the space is not [[sober space|sober]]).  Conversely, every locale induces a topology on its set of points, but sometimes a great deal of information is lost; there are many different locales whose space of points is empty.  We say that a locale is _spatial_ if it can be recovered from its space of points.

One motivation for locales is that since they take the notion of "open set" as basic, with the points (if any) being a derived notion, they are exactly what is needed to define [[sheaf|sheaves]].  The notion of sheaf on a topological space only refers to the open sets, rather than the points, so it carries over word-for-word to a definition of sheaves on locales.  Moreover, passage from locales to their [[topos|toposes]] of sheaves is a [[full and faithful functor]], unlike for topological spaces.

Another advantage of locales is that they are better-behaved than topological spaces in [[constructive mathematics]] or [[internalization|internal]] to an arbitrary topos.  For example, constructively the topological space $[0,1]$ need not be [[compact space|compact]], but the _locale_ $[0,1]$ is always compact (in a suitable sense).  It follows that the locale $[0,1]$, and hence also the locale $R$ of real numbers, is not always spatial.  When it fails to be spatial, because there are "not enough real numbers," the locale is generally a better-behaved object than the topological space of real numbers.


## Definition ##

A **[[frame]]** $A$ is a [[partial order|poset]] with all [[join|joins]] and all finite [[meet|meets]] which satisfies the _infinite distributive law_:
$$ x \wedge (\bigvee_i y_i) = \bigvee_i (x\wedge y_i).$$
A **frame homomorphism** $\phi: A\to B$ is a function which preserves finite meets and arbitrary joins.

By the [[adjoint functor theorem]] for posets, a frame also has all meets, but a frame homomorphism need not preserve them.  Again by the AFT, a frame is automatically a [[Heyting algebra]], but again a frame homomorphism need not preserve the Heyting implication.

The [[category]] of **locales** is the [[opposite category|opposite]] of the category of frames.  That is, a locale $X$ "is" a frame, which we often write as $O(X)$ and call "the frame of open sets in $X$", and a **continuous map** $f:X\to Y$ of locales is a frame homomorphism $f^*:O(Y)\to O(X)$. If you think of a frame as an algebraic structure (a [[lattice]] satisfying a completeness condition), then this is an example of the [[duality]] of [[space and quantity]].


## Relation to topological spaces ##

Every topological space $X$ has a frame of open sets $O(X)$, and therefore gives rise to a locale $X_l$.  For every continuous function $f:X\to Y$ between spaces, the inverse image map $f^{-1}:O(Y)\to O(X)$ is a frame homomorphism, so $f$ induces a continuous map $f_l:X_l\to Y_l$ of locales.  Thus we have a functor $(-)_l:Top \to Loc$.

Conversely, if $X$ is any locale, we define a **point** of $X$ to be a continuous map $1\to X$.  Here $1$ is the terminal locale, which can be defined as the locale $1_l$ corresponding to the terminal space.  Explicitly, we have $O(1) = P(1)$, the powerset of $1$ (the initial frame, the set of [[truth value]]s, which is 2 classically or in a [[Boolean topos]]).  Since a frame homomorphism $O(X)\to P(1)$ is determined by the preimage of $1$, a point can also be described more explicitly as a _completely prime filter_: an upwards-closed subset $F$ of $O(X)$ such that $X\in F$ ($X$ denotes the top element of $O(X)$), if $U,V\in F$ then $U\cap V\in F$, and if  $\bigcup_i U_i\in F$ then $U_i\in F$ for some $i$.

The elements of $O(X)$ induce a topology on the set of points of $X$ in an obvious way, thereby giving rise to a topological space $X_p$.  Any continuous map $f:X\to Y$ of locales induces a continuous map $f_p:X_p\to Y_p$ of spaces, so we have another functor $(-)_P:Loc\to Top$.

It is not hard to check that $(-)_l$ is left adjoint to $(-)_p$.  In fact, this is an [[idempotent adjunction]], and therefore it restricts to an equivalence between the fixed subcategories on either side.  A space with $X\cong X_{lp}$ is called **[[sober space|sober]]**, while a locale with $X\cong X_{pl}$ is called **spatial**.


## In the context of $(n,r)$-topos theory ##

Recall the definition of [[(n,r)-category]] in general and of [[(0,1)-category]] in particular.

It turns out that a [[(0,1)-topos]] is essentially the same as a [[Heyting algebra]], and a [[Grothendieck topos|Grothendieck]] $(0,1)$-topos is a locale.

## Related concepts ##

A [[ionad]] is supposed to be to a [[topological space]] as a [[Grothendieck topos]] is to a [[locale]].

## References ##

*  P. T. Johnstone, _[[Elephant|Sketches of an elephant: a topos theory compendium]]_.  Part C (volume 2).

The book

*  P. T. Johnstone, _[[Stone Spaces]]_

develops, among other things, much of standard [[topology]] entirely with the notion of locale used in place of that of [[topological space]]s. See [[Stone Spaces]] for details.


[[!redirects locales]]