
#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}


## Definition 

The **d&#233;calage** $Dec\, Y$ of a [[simplicial set]] $Y$, is the simplicial set obtained by shifting every dimension down by one, 'forgetting' the last face and degeneracy  of $Y$ in each dimension:

* $(Dec \, Y)_n = Y_{n+1}$;
* $d_k^{n,Dec \,Y}  = d^{n+1,Y}_{k}$;
* $s_k^{n,Dec \,Y}  = s^{n+1,Y}_{k}$.




This simplicial set comes with a natural projection, $d_{last} : Dec\, Y \to Y$, given by the 'left over' face map.     Moreover this map gives a [[homotopy equivalence]]

$$Dec\,Y \simeq K(Y_0,0),$$

between $Dec\, Y$ and the constant simplicial set on $Y_0$. 

The same construction works in other contexts, as is easily seen. The case of $Dec G$ for $G$ a [[simplicial group]] is important in the simplicial theory of algebraic models for [[homotopy n-type]]s.

The map $d_{last} : Dec\, Y \to Y$, is a [[Kan fibration]], and in particular, in the simplicial group case, $d_{last} : Dec\, G \to G$, is an epimorphism.  Taking the kernel of this and then applying $\pi_0$, yields a [[crossed module]] constructed from the [[Moore complex]] of $G$

$$NG_1/d_2(NG_2)\to NG_0,$$

which has kernel $\pi_1(G)$ and cokernel $\pi_0(G)$.

## Decalage comonad 

Decalage also has an abstract nonsense description as follows. The simplicial category, as a monoidal category $(\Delta, +, 0)$ equipped with the monoid $1$, is the "walking monoid", i.e., is initial among monoidal categories equipped with a monoid. Therefore $\Delta^{op}$ is the walking comonoid; as a result, there is a comonad 

$$- + 1: \Delta^{op} \to \Delta^{op}$$ 

which induces a comonad on simplicial sets whose underlying functor is precisely decalage: 

$$Dec: Set^{\Delta^{op}} \to Set^{\Delta^{op}}$$

The map $d_{last}: Dec \to Id$ is the counit of this comonad. The comonad itself is analogous to a kind of unbiased path space comonad $P$ on $Top$ whose value at a space $X$ is a pullback 

$$\array{
P X & \to & X^I \\
\downarrow & & \downarrow eval_0 \\
|X| & \stackrel{i}{\to} & X
}$$

where $i$ is the set-theoretic identity inclusion of $X$ equipped with the discrete topology. Thus we have 

$$P X = \sum_{x_0 \in X} P(X, x_0),$$ 

the sum over all possible basepoints $x_0$ of path spaces based at $x_0$. The analogy is made precise by a canonical isomorphism 

$$Dec \circ S \cong S \circ P$$ 

where $S: Top \to Set^{\Delta^{op}}$ is simplicial singularization. 

A $P$-coalgebra partitions $X$ into path components and exhibits contractibility of each component. Similarly, a coalgebra of the decelage comonad exhibits the acyclicity of the underlying simplicial set. 

####Total D&#233;calage####
 Using either the simplicial [[comonadic resolution]] generated by the above comonad or directly using ordinal sum, we get a [[bisimplicial set]] known as the [[total décalage]] of $Y$. This will be explored more fully in a separate entry.

## Literature

A reasonably full discussion of the d&#233;calage can be found in Luc Illusie's thesis, 

* L. Illusie, 1971, _Complexe cotangent et deformations I_, volume 239 of Lecture Notes in Maths ,  Springer-Verlag. and  1972, _Complexe cotangent et deformations II_, volume 283 of Lecture Notes in 
Maths , Springer-Verlag. 

It is used in Duskin's Memoir, 

* [[John Duskin]], 1975, _Simplicial methods and the interpretation of "triple" cohomology_, number  163 in Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 3, Amer. Math. Soc.


The notion of decalage is widely appearing since the paper introducing the method of [[cohomological descent]] in [[Hodge theory]]:

* [[Pierre Deligne]], _Th&#233;orie de Hodge. III_, Inst. Hautes &#201;tudes Sci. Publ. Math. __44__ (1974), 5--77. 

An application in theory of stacks is in

* [[Anders Kock]], _The stack quotient of a groupoid_, Cahiers de Topologie et G&#233;om&#233;trie Diff&#233;rentielle Cat&#233;goriques, __44__ no. 2 (2003), p. 85--104 [numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CTGDC_2003__44_2_85_0)