Noncommutative Hodge theory is being developed by L. Katzarkov, M. Kontsevich, and T. Pantev.

Noncommutative Hodge theory is a generalization of classical [[Hodge theory]].  Whereas classical Hodge theory works for commutative spaces (e.g. algebraic varieties), noncommutative Hodge theory concerns certain types of "noncommutative spaces". In the theory of Katzarkov-Kontsevich-Pantev, noncommutative spaces are taken to be certain [[dg-categories]] (see the pages on [[noncommutative geometry]] and [[noncommutative algebraic geometry]]). In particular, they are interested in the dg-categories which arise in mirror symmetry: for example, [[Fukaya category|Fukaya categories]], (dg enhanced) [[derived categories]] of (quasi-)coherent sheaves, [[matrix factorization]] categories, [[Fukaya-Seidel categories]]. 

The noncommutative analogue of [[Dolbeault cohomology]] is the [[Hochschild homology]] of the category. The analogue of [[de Rham cohomology]] is the periodic [[cyclic cohomology|cyclic homology]] of the category. The analogue of the Hodge-de Rham spectral sequence is the Hochschild-cyclic spectral sequence. There is work of Weibel which makes this analogy precise.

There is a conjecture of Kontsevich that the Hochschild-cyclic spectral sequence degenerates for smooth and proper noncommutative spaces. (This is of course the analogue of the Hodge-de Rham degeneration for smooth and proper varieties.) Kontsevich's conjecture has been proven in some cases by, for instance, Kaledin. Kaledin adapts Deligne-Illusie's proof of Hodge-de Rham degeneration to the noncommutative setting. Kontsevich's conjecture is known as the "degeneration conjecture".

See "Hodge theoretic aspects of mirror symmetry" by Katzarkov-Kontsevich-Pantev http://arxiv.org/abs/0806.0107