<div class="rightHandSide toc">
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
</div>


#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

#Many Model Structures#

Philosophically, [[model category|model structures]] allow one to localize a category at a particular collection of weak equivalences, which one would like to formally invert.  For [[topological space]]s, there are two natural candidates for the collection $W$ of weak equivalences: the [[weak homotopy equivalence]]s and the [[homotopy equivalence]]s.  Both of these have accompanying model structures.  Interestingly, these two model structures can also be combined to form what's known as the _mixed_ model structure.

All of these model structures exist not only on the category of all topological spaces, but also on most [[nice category of spaces|nice categories]] of spaces.  Using a nice category instead is sometimes important, such as if we want the model structure to be [[monoidal model category|monoidal]].

#Model Structure 1#

The first, and most prevalent, model structure has $W$ the class of weak homotopy equivalences. The fibrations $F$ are the **Serre fibrations**, maps which have the right lifting property with respect to all inclusions of the form $i_0 : D^n \hookrightarrow D^n \times I$ that include the $n$-disc as $D^n \times \{0\}$.

The cofibrations have a nice description as well as "retracts of relative cell complexes." In fact, this situation is quite general. The cofibrations $C$ are generated by the set of boundary inclusions $S^{n-1} \hookrightarrow D^n$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$ in the sense that they are the smallest saturated class containing these morphisms. As a consequence, of Quillen's small object argument, all cofibrations have the form described above, where a relative cell complex is a transfinite composite of pushouts of coproducts of these generating maps.

This model structure is Quillen equivalent to the classical [[model structure on simplicial sets]] via the total singular complex and geometric realization functors.

#Model Structure 2#

A second model structure has $W$ the class of homotopy equivalences and $F$ the class of **Hurewicz fibrations**, which are defined to be maps that have the right lifting property with respect to _all_ inclusions $i_0 : A \hookrightarrow A \times I$ for any topological space $A$. The cofibrations are determined by these classes and are called the **Hurewicz cofibrations**.

#Mixed Model Structure#

From the definitions, Hurewicz fibrations are necessarily Serre fibrations. It is well-known that homotopy equivalences are weak homotopy equivalences. If we write $(C_1, F_1, W_1)$ for the classes of the first model structure and $(C_2, F_2, W_2)$ for the classes of the second, we have $W_2 \subset W_1$ and $F_2 \subset F_1$. 

In general given two model structures with these inclusions, we get a third **mixed model structure** $(C_m, F_2, W_1)$ where the cofibrations $C_m$ are determined by the other two classes.

On topological spaces, this model structure has weak homotopy equivalences for weak equivalences and Hurewicz fibrations for fibrations.  The cofibrant spaces (the [[m-cofibrant space]]s) are precisely those spaces that are weakly homotopy equivalent to [[CW complex]]es.

# References #

For the original "Quillen" or "q-" model structure:

* Quillen, _Homotopical algebra_

* Any book on model categories, such as Hovey's _Model categories_ or Hirschhorn's _Model categories and their localizations_.

For the "Hurewicz," "Str&#248;m," or "h-" model structure:

* Arne Str&oslash;m, _The homotopy category is a homotopy category_, Archiv der Mathematik 23 (1972)

For the "mixed" or "m-" model structure:

* Michael Cole, _Mixing model structures_, Topology Appl. 153 no. 7 (2006)
