
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

The _covariant phase space_ of a system in [[physics]] is the [[space]] of all of its solutions to its [[classical mechanics|classical equations of motion]], the space of _classical trajectories_ of the system. 

For a system described by [[Lagrangian]] mechanics this comes canonically equipped with a [[presymplectic structure]]. A proper _phase space_ or _reduced phase space_ is a subspace or [[quotient space]] of the covariant phase space on which the presymplectic structure refines to a [[symplectic manifold|symplectic structure]] or [[Poisson manifold|Poisson strucure]]. 

Typically these phase spaces are (locally) naturally parameterized by the suitable boundary conditions which uniquely determine the corresponding history of the physical system. Much of the literature on phase spaces deals with parameterizing these boundary conditions. 

For instance for a [[relativistic particle|particle]] propagating on a [[Riemannian manifold]] $X$ with the usual [[action functional]], a trajectory is uniquely fixed by the position $x \in X$ and the momentum $p \in T^*_x X$ of the particle at a given time. Correspondingly the space of all solutions and hence the (covariant) phase space of the system may be identified with the [[cotangent bundle]] $T^* X$ of $X$.  
 
However, even reduced phase spaces are not all cotangent bundles, typically not, for instance, if they are obtained by [[symplectic reduction]]. This way a finite-dimensional phase space can sometimes describe continuous systems (e.g. in hydrodynamics) whch have infinitely many degrees of freedom; that phase space is however not a cotangent bundle of something in general. 


## Covariant phase space


### (S) Via pre-symplectic structures
 {#ViaSymplecticStructure}

Following the [[variational bicomplex]] terminology, there
are two kinds of form gradings and two kinds of exterior
differentials: spacetime and variational.


A [[local action functional]] is defined by a [[Lagrangian]] [[spacetime]] density. Its variational differential can be written as the sum of the Euler-Lagrange form-density (variational form, spacetime density) and the spacetime differential of a pre-symplectic potential form-current.

Integrating this current over any [[Cauchy surface]] and taking an
exterior variational derivative gives a [[pre-symplectic form]] on the [[space of field configurations]] (which need not satisfy [[equations of motion]]). The resulting pre-symplectic form depends on the choice of the Cauchy surface. Performing [[symplectic reduction]] gives the symplectic space of equivalence classes of solutions of equations of motion modulo [[gauge transformation]]s, which is the _covariant phase space_ . The end point of the reduction no longer depends on the choice of the Cauchy surface.

### (P) Via Poisson structures
 {#ViiaPoissonStructure}
 
The covariant phase space can be embedded into the 
[[space of field configurations]] as a subspace of the set of solutions that transversely intersects [[gauge orbit]]s. This embedding is characterized as the [[zero locus]] of the [[equations of motion]] and some [[gauge fixing]] conditions. The non-degenerate [[Poisson structure]] on the algebra of functions on the covariant phase space is given by the [[Peierls bracket]]. 

The Peierls bracket of two functions $A$ and $B$ is the antisymmetrized influence on $B$ of an infinitesimal perturbation of a gauge-fixed action by function that restricts to $A$ on the embedding. The algebra of functions on the space of field configurations becomes a [[Poisson algebra]] in the following way. Pick a set of functions on the space of field configurations that restrict to a non-degenerate coordinate system on the embedded covariant phase space. These functions, together with the equations of motion and gauge fixing conditions define a Poisson bivector by being declared canonical, such that the kernel of the bivector coincides with the ideal generated by the equations of motion
and the gauge fixing conditions. Obviously the Poisson structure thus
constructed on the algebra of functions on field configurations is not unique and depends on the above choice of coordinates; the same
non-uniqueness may be parametrized instead by a choice of a [[connection on a bundle|connection]] on the space of field configurations. The embedded covariant phase space becomes a leaf of the symplectic [[foliation]] of the space of field configurations.


## Examples

### In dg-geometry

Let the ambient context be that of [[dg-geometry]]. Let $C$ be an ordinary [[smooth manifold]], assumed finite dimensional for the moment, and $\exp(i S) : C \to \mathbb{R}/\mathbb{Z}$ an ordinary [[smooth function]] such that its 0-locus is an sub-manifold.

Then a presentation for the homotopy fiber of $\exp(i S)$ is given by the formal dual of the [[dg-algebra]]

$$
 (\wedge^{-\bullet}_{C^\infty(X)}\Gamma(T X), \iota_{(-)} d \exp(i S))
  =
 \left[
  \cdots \to \wedge_{C^\infty(X)}^2\Gamma(T X) \stackrel{{\iota_{(-)}d \exp(i S)}}{\to} \Gamma(T X) \stackrel{\iota_{(-)}d \exp(i S)}{\to} C^\infty(X) 
  \right]
$$

concentrated in non-positive degree, which in degree $k$ has the $k$th exterior powers of the [[tangent vector]]s of $X$ and whose differential is given by contracting a tangent vector with the 1-form $d \exp(i S)$.  

This is a [[Koszul resolution]]-type resolution of the 0-locus of $\exp(i S)$. More generally, the homotopy fiber is given by a [[Koszul-Tate resolution]]-type complex. This is known as the _antifield complex_ in the [[BV-BRST formalism|BV-BRST formulation]] of derived phase spaces.

## References


### Covariant phase space

It seems that there have been two independent lines of development,
somewhat independent of each other, but also with some
crosspollination along the way. One stream [(P)](#ViaPoissonStructure) was concerned with the
construction of a [[Poisson structure]] on functions of solutions, while the other [(S)](#ViaSymplecticStructure) was concerned with the construction of a  [[symplectic form]]
on the space of solutions. Obviously, the differences between the two
kinds of constructions show up precisely in [[gauge theory]] systems.

The earliest papers are those of Peierls and
Bergmann-Schiller in the early 50's. They seem to have been
self-motivated. Below, we try to list papers that have established key results or have served as important popularizers together with their
main influences from previous works. The constructions of the (S)
stream seem to have appeared nearly independently several times over
several decades, until Lee-Wald and followups of Ashtekar's papers
became standard references. The (P) stream flowed slowly, but
consistently from original idea of Peierls. The papers of
Fredenhagen-Duetsch-et-al are a most readable modern formulation.

* R. Peierls, _The commutation laws of relativistic field theory_ (1952) ([jstor](http://www.jstor.org/pss/99080))

  (P)

  Influence: Appears to be self-motivated. The result may have been
guessed from the known unequal-time, covariant Poisson brackets
between free fields, which involve the causal Green function in an
explicit way.

  Result: The Peierls bracket on the covariant phase pace of a non-gauge system is defined and equivalence with the Hamiltonian phase space symplectic structure is proved. Gauge systems are treated by example of electrodynamics. The solution to degenerate equations of motion is either adding gauge fixing terms to the action or consider non-degenerate equations of motion satisfied by gauge invariant fields. Fermions are handled by multiplying fermi fields by formal odd parameters.


* Bergmann-Schiller, _Classical and quantum field theories in the Lagrangian Formalism_ Phys. Rev. 89 4-16 (1953)  ([prola](http://prola.aps.org/abstract/PR/v89/i1/p4_1))

  (S)

  Influence: Appears to be motivated by Bergmann's long term and "brute force" analysis of the gauge invariance structure of relativity and structurally similar theories. Another motivation is the possibility of writing divergence-less stress energy tensors as "curls" of "superpotentials".

  Result: The pre-symplectic potential form-current makes an appearance. The definitions of the covariant phase space and the resulting symplectic form on it are obscure (at least to me), but later papers make reference to them.

* Bergmann-Goldberg-Janis-Newman, _Canonical Transformations and Commutators in the Lagrangian Formalism_ Phys. Rev. 103, 807&#8211;813 (1956) ([prola](http://prola.aps.org/abstract/PR/v103/i3/p807_1))

  (P&S) 

  Influence: Peierls, Bergmann-Schiller

  Result: Proof of the equivalence between the Peierls bracket and the bracket obtained by Bergmann-Schiller for non-gauge systems. The
treatment of gauge systems and many of the calculations are maybe a  bit obscure.

* Komar, _Commutators on Characteristic Surfaces_ 
  Phys. Rev. 134, B1430&#8211;B1440 (1964) 
  (proceedings w/ Bergmann 1962)

  (S) 

  Influence: Bergmann-Schiller

  Result: Uses the methods of Bergmann-Schiller to define Poisson
brackets on initial data for linearized gravitational waves on null
hypersurfaces, including at null infinity.

* DeWitt B.S., DeWitt C. (eds.) _Relativity, Groups, and Topology_ 
  (Les Houches 1963, Gordon and Breach, 1964), pp.585-820
  (1964; lecture notes 1963)

 (P) 

 Influence: Peierls

 Result: A more detailed exposition of Peierls' idea, with a bit more
generality in the treatment of gauge systems. Becomes a standard reference along with Peierls' original paper.


* Ashtekar-Magnon, _On the symplectic structure of general relativity_ Communications in Mathematical Physics
Volume 86, Number 1, 55-68, DOI: 10.1007/BF01205661 (1982) ([springer](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01205661))

  (S)

  Influence: Komar, also some more obscure papers by Fridmann and Palmer

  Result: Write down the explicit pre-symplectic current and the
corresponding pre-symplectic form on the space of solutions of
linearized gravitational wave equations. This symplectic form on the
reduced space of solutions is shown to coincide with the ADM
symplectic structure and with the Komar symplectic structure at null
infinity. The motivation explicit pre-symplectic current formula
appears from the desire to interpolate between the above two
formalisms.

* [[Edward Witten]] _Interacting field theory of open superstrings_ Nuclear Physics B
Volume 276, Issue 2, 13 October 1986, Pages 291-324  (1986) ([web](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(86)90298-1))

  (S)

  Influence: Appears to be self-motivated. Witten needed a covariant way to define Poisson brackets from the action of open string field
theory. Acknowledges parallel, independent work of Zuckerman.

  Result: Witten writes down the pre-symplectic form-current "by
inspection" for a scalar field and for a Chern-Simons theory, then he
explicitly shows that the current is conserved on the space of
solutions, and that its integral over a Cauchy surface is
variationally closed.


* (S) Ashtekar-Bombelli-Koul (1987; preprint 1986)
Influence: Ashtekar-Magnon

  Result: Explicit formula for the symplectic form of full, nonlinear
general relativity as an integral of a conserved form-current over an
arbitrary Cauchy surface. Discussion of conversion of symmetries into
conserved quantities using this form. Some of the aspects related to
the construction of such conserved have apparently been treated in
earlier works by Friedman, Sachs and possibly some others.
YS Kim, WW Zachary (eds.), The Physics of Phase Space: Nonlinear
Dynamics and Chaos, Geometric Quantization, and Wigner Function
(p.356) ISBN 0-387-17894-5

* (S) Zuckerman (1987; preprint 1986)

  Influence: Appears to be self-motivated. Possible motivation is a more general construction of conserved currents in variational problems, a la Noether. Acknowledges that he reproduces parallel, but applied to specific theories, work of Crnkovic-Witten and Ashtekar-Bombelli-Koul.

  Result: The construction of the pre-symplectic potential form-current and pre-symplectic form-current are given in essentially modern terms. Not all proofs are given. Little discussion of symplectic reduction.

  Zuckerman G.J. Action principles and global geometry (Mathematical
aspects of string theory (San Diego, Calif., 1986), pp.259-284, Adv.
Ser. Math. Phys., vol. 1, 1987)

* (S) Crnkovic-Witten (1987)

  Influence: Witten

  Result: Applies the "by inspection" methods of Witten's earlier paper to write down conserved, variationally-closed pre-symplectic currents for Yang-Mills and general relativity.
Hawking S.W., Israel W. (eds.) 300 years of gravitation (CUP, 1987)
(p.676) (ISBN 0521343127)

* (S) Lee-Wald (1989)
Influence: Crnkovic-Witten, Friedman
Result: Essentially gives the modern formulation as I described it at
the top. The exposition is quite similar to Zuckerman (though no
connection with that work is made), but with complete proofs.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.528801

* (P) Marolf (1994; preprints 1993, thesis 1992)
Influence: Peierls, DeWitt; mentions but does not use the material
from Lee-Wald, Crnkovic-Witten, Ashtekar
Result: Gives the construction I outlined at the top.
(arXiv:hep-th/9308141) http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/aphy.1994.1116
(arXiv:hep-th/9308150) http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/aphy.1994.1117

* (S) Hollands-Marolf (2007, preprint 2006)
Influence: Lee-Wald
Result: Extends analysis to classical fermi fields.
(arXiv:gr-qc/0611044) http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0264-9381/24/9/010

* (P) Duetsch-Fredenhagen (2003), Brennecke-Duetsch (2008), Rejzner (2011)
Influence: Peierls, DeWitt, Marolf; also some ideas related to
retarded products that go back to Glaser-Lehmann-Zimmermann in the
1950s
Result: Modern, elementary treatment of the Peierls bracket, including
for classical fermi fields. The discussion is simplified by sticking
to non-degenerate (or gauge fixed) actions. The choice of coordinates
on the space of field configurations is simplified by considering only
vector bundle valued fields.
(arXiv:hep-th/0211242) http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00220-003-0968-4
(arxiv:0705.3160) http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S0129055X08003237
(arXiv:1101.5126)



An early description of the [[presymplectic structure]] on covariant phase space is in

* G. J. Zuckerman, _Action Principles and Global Geometry_ , in Mathematical Aspects of String Theory, S. T. Yau (Ed.), World Scienti&#166;c, Singapore, 1987, pp. 259&#8364;284.

and 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Interacting field theory of open superstrings_ , Nucl. Phys. B276, 291

and further developed in

* C. Crnkovi&#263;, _Symplectic Geometry of the Covariant Phase Space_ , Class. Quant. Grav. 5 (1988) 1557&#128;1575.

A discussion of its application to non-abelian [[gauge theory]] ([[Yang-Mills theory]]) and of [[gravity]] is in 

* C. Crnkovi&#263;, [[Edward Witten]], _Covariant Description of Canonical Formalism in Geometrical Theories_, in Three Hundred Years of Gravitation, S. W. Hawking and W. Israel (Eds.), Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1987, pp. 676&#8364;684. ([pdf](http://www.phys.lsu.edu/classes/spring2006/phys7777/crnkovicwitten.pdf))

Reviews of covariant phase space theory:

* L. Vitagliano, _Secondary calculus and the covariant phase space_, [pdf](http://diffiety.ac.ru/preprint/2008/02-08.pdf)

* M. J. Gotay, J. Isenberg, R. Montgomery, J. E. Marsden, _Momentum Maps and Classical Fields, Part I: Covariant Field Theory_ [pdf](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.6.6137&rep=rep1&type=pdf)

A discussion in the context of the [[variational bicomplex]] with further pointers to the use in [[physics]] is in 

* E. Reyes, _On Covariant Phase Space and the Variational Bicomplex_ , Int. J. Theor. Phys. 43, no 5 (2004) 1267&#8364;1286

A systematic discussion leading up to the derived covariant phase space by [[BRST-BV formalism]] is in section 8.3 of

* [[Frédéric Paugam]], _Towards the mathematics of quantum field theory_ ([pdf](http://www.math.jussieu.fr/~fpaugam/documents/enseignement/master-mathematical-physics-impa-v01-2011.pdf))
{#Paugam}


### Reduced phase space

Standard textbooks on [[classical mechanics]] include

* [[Vladimir Arnold]], _Mathematical methods of classical mechanics_

* H. Goldstein, _Classical mechanics_

* L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifshitz, _Mechanics_, (vol. I of [[Landau-Lifschitz]] Course on theoretical physics)

* R. Abraham, J. E. Marsden, _Foundations of mechanics_

* J. E. Marsden, T. Ratiu, _Introduction to mechanics and symmetry_

* wikipedia: [phase space](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_space)

[[!redirects covariant phase space]]

[[!redirects phase spaces]]
[[!redirects covariant phase spaces]]

[[!redirects reduced phase space]]