Is there a nice _arrow theoretic_ way to define vector spaces?

_[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]] says_: There is comparatively nice abstract nonsense to be said about _rings_. For instance, a [[ring]] is a category with one object [[internalization|internal to]] the category of abelian groups. From that starting point the concepts of ring theory develop rather naturally from pure category theoretic reasoning. In particular [[module|modules]] over rings appear naturally.

For some reason this is different when rings are refined to _fields_ and modules to vector spaces. The very concept of a _field_ is somehow not as natural from a category theoretic perspective, or at least I don't see how it is. This problem becomes very manifest when one tries to categorigfy fields and vector spaces: it is very straightforward to categorify rings and their modules, but their refinement to categorified fields  and vector spaces is harder.

[[Eric Forgy|Eric]] says: <nowiki>*tongue in cheek*</nowiki> Well, fields are closely tied to the continuum and we know the continuum is not natural :)

[[Toby Bartels|Toby]] says: \*tongue where it belongs\* A field may be defined a ring that has been decomposed (as a set) as the sum of a point and a group, with the point being the zero element and the the group being a multiplicative submonoid. However, this definition does not work in constructive analysis; one cannot prove constructively that the ring of real numbers has this property. Instead, one must define a field to be a ring equipped with an [[apartness relation]] satisfying some properties (which I can write down if desired). Classically, an apartness relation is a vacuous structure, but in constructive mathematics its properties have a very topological flavour, even though it\'s much simpler than a topology. All of the deep issues about the continuum are already there in the constructivists\' notion of apartness, which they require to even define what a field is.