pages/8/2/2/8/8228/content.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Group Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include group theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Within [[group theory]], *geometric group theory* studies [[groups]] by equipping them with a [[metric]] and thus regarding them as [[metric spaces]]. 

For [[finitely generated group|finitely generated groups]] this is typically done by regarding the group's [[elements]] as the [[vertices]] of a [[graph]] -- the *[[Cayley graph]]* -- whose [[edges]] connect elements related by multiplication with a generator. The corresponding [[graph distance]] then equips the group with a [[metric]].

## Related entries

* [[Cayley graph]]

* [[Cayley distance]], [[Kendall distance]]

## References

Textbooks:


* [[Persi Diaconis]], Chapter 6 of: *Group Representations in Probability  and Statistics*, Lecture Notes - Monographs Series, Institute of Mathematical Statistics 1988 ([pdf](https://jdc.math.uwo.ca/M9140a-2012-summer/Diaconis.pdf))


* [[Cornelia Druţu]], [[Michael Kapovich]] (appendix by [[Bogdan Nica]]), *Geometric group theory*, Colloquium Publications **63**, AMS 2018 ([ISBN:978-1-4704-1104-6](https://bookstore.ams.org/coll-63/), [pdf](https://courses.maths.ox.ac.uk/node/view_material/35649))

See also:

* Wikipedia, _[Geometric group theory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometric_group_theory)_

Commit message:

Revision ID: 162732 Update date: 2021-04-20 05:54:01+00:00 Page name: geometric group theory

pages/8/2/2/8/8228/content.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Group Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include group theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Within [[group theory]], *geometric group theory* studies [[groups]] by equipping them with a [[metric]] and thus regarding them as [[metric spaces]]. 

For [[finitely generated group|finitely generated groups]] this is typically done by regarding the group's [[elements]] as the [[vertices]] of a [[graph]] -- the *[[Cayley graph]]* -- whose [[edges]] connect elements related by multiplication with a generator. The corresponding [[graph distance]] then equips the group with a [[metric]].

The methods of geometric group theory overlap with [[kernel methods]] in [[machine learning]].

## Related entries

* [[Cayley graph]]

* [[Cayley distance]], [[Kendall distance]]

## References

Textbooks:


* [[Persi Diaconis]], Chapter 6 of: *Group Representations in Probability  and Statistics*, Lecture Notes - Monographs Series, Institute of Mathematical Statistics 1988 ([pdf](https://jdc.math.uwo.ca/M9140a-2012-summer/Diaconis.pdf))


* [[Cornelia Druţu]], [[Michael Kapovich]] (appendix by [[Bogdan Nica]]), *Geometric group theory*, Colloquium Publications **63**, AMS 2018 ([ISBN:978-1-4704-1104-6](https://bookstore.ams.org/coll-63/), [pdf](https://courses.maths.ox.ac.uk/node/view_material/35649))

See also:

* Wikipedia, _[Geometric group theory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometric_group_theory)_
