It is practically impossible to model a macroscopic system in terms of the microscopic kinematical and dynamical variables of all its particles. Thus one makes a hierarchial reduction in which this complexity is reduced to small number of collective variables. The theoretical framewok for such reductions for systems is [[statistical mechanics]] or statistical physics.

One special case of hierarchial reduction is the limit of large volumes $V$, in which the number of particles (of each species) $N/V$ stays constant. This is called the **thermodynamic limit** in statistical physics. Under some standard assumptions like homogeneity (spacial and possibly directional) and stability (no transitory effects), there is a small number of collective variables characterizing the system. Such a description can be (and historically was) postulated as an independent self-consistent phenomenological theory even without going into the details of statistical mechanics; such a description is called **equilibrium thermodynamics**, which is believed to be deducable from statistical mechanics, as has been partially proved for some classes of systems. Sometimes transitional finite-time phenomena are described either statistically by studying stochastic processes or by a more elaborate hierarchial form of thermodynamics, so-called **nonequilibrium thermodynamics**. 

One of the basic characteristics of a thermodynamical system is its [[temperature]], which has no analogue in fundamental non-statistical physics. Other common thermodynamical variables include pressure, volume, [[entropy]], enthalpy etc. 