## Idea ##

The suspension $S X$ of a [[topological space]] $X$ is a space of one higher dimension, which is (for [[inhabited set|inhabited]] $X$) a [[quotient object|quotient space]] of $X \times [0,1]$.  The difference between $S X$ and $X \times [0,1]$ is that the copy of $X$ at each endpoint ($0$ or $1$) is replaced by a single point.

Note that we *replace* $X$ by a single point at each endpoint; we don\'t merely *identify* all of the points in $X$ there.  This only makes a different for the [[empty space]]; we should have $S \empty = \{0,1\}$, not $S \empty = \empty$.  (This is related to the issues in the definition of [[connected space]].)

Compare the [[reduced suspension]], where you start with a [[pointed space]] and identify all copies of the base point as well.


## Definition ##

Let $X$ be a [[topological space]]; let $I$ be the unit [[interval]] $[0,1]$ in the [[real line]], and let $2$ be the $2$-point [[discrete space]] $\{0,1\}$.  Let $X \times I$ be the [[cartesian product]] of $X$ and $I$; let $(X \times I) + 2$ be the [[disjoint union]] of $X \times I$ and $2$.  We will suppress reference to the inclusion maps from $X \times I$ and $2$ into $(X \times I) + 2$; you can parse an element of the latter by seeing whether it is a pair or not.

The __suspension__ $S X$ of $X$ is the [[quotient space]] of $(X \times I) + 2$ by the [[equivalence relation]] $\sim$ generated by:
*  $(a,0) \sim (b,0)$ for $a, b$ in $X$;
*  $(a,1) \sim (b,1)$ for $a, b$ in $X$;
*  $(a,0) \sim 0$ for $a$ in $X$;
*  $(a,1) \sim 1$ for $a$ in $X$.

If $X$ has a point $p$, then we can define the $S X$ as a quotient space of $X \times I$ by the equivalence relation generated by the first two clauses above, since we have $(p,0) \sim 0$ and $(p,1) \sim 1$.  But this simplification doesn\'t work otherwise.

It\'s easy to see that the suspension operation $S$ extends a [[functor]] from [[Top]] to itself.


## Examples ##

The suspension of the $n$-[[cube]] is the $(n+1)$-cube, probably best visualised as a diamond.  This gives a [[recursion|recursive]] definition of cube, starting with the $0$-cube as the [[point]], which is not the suspension of anything.  Note that this not only gives us the topological structure of the cube, but also (by working in an appropriate category throughout) the correct smooth structure on the cube as a [[manifold]] with corners and even the correct [[metric space|metric]] on the cube (if normalised to have diagonals of length $1$).

Up to topological structure, the suspension of the $n$-[[sphere]] is the $(n+1)$-sphere; note that the $n$-sphere is (topologically) the boundary of the $(n+1)$-cube.  The coincidence that 'sphere' and 'suspension' both begin with 's' has not been ignored; we can write $S^n \cong S^n(2)$, where $S^n$ on the left is the $n$-sphere and $S^n$ on the right is the $n$-fold [[composite]] of the suspension functor.  Actually, you should start with the $(-1)$-sphere as the [[empty space]], which is not the suspension of anything; then the $0$-sphere is $S \empty = 2$.  However, this does not give the correct smooth structure on the sphere (unless perhaps there is some more sophisticated definition that fixes this); it might be more appropriate to say that the suspension of the $n$-[[globe]] is the $(n+1)$-globe.

Up to topological structure, the suspension of the $n$-[[simplex]] is the $(n+1)$-simplex, but now this is not very useful.  To study simplices, you should use the [[cone]] functor instead, which identifies only $(a,0)$ but not $(a,1)$.


[[!redirects suspension functor]]