
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Lie theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-Lie theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


\tableofcontents


## Idea 

In any [[Lie algebra]] we can define the **triple [[commutator]]** of three elements by 

$$ 
  [a,b,c] \;\coloneqq\; \big[[a,b],c\big]
  \mathrlap{\,,} 
$$

and this obeys [[axioms]] which form the definition of a **Lie triple system**.  Furthermore, the space of elements of odd degree in any [[cyclic group of order 2|$\mathbb{Z}/2$]]-[[graded Lie algebra]] forms a Lie triple system, and thus so does the [[tangent space]] of a [[symmetric space]] at any point.

## Definition 

A **Lie triple system** is a [[vector space]] $V$ equipped with a [[trilinear map]] $[\cdot,\cdot,\cdot] \colon V \times V \times V \to V$ obeying the following three identities:

$$ [u,v,w] = -[v,u,w] $$

$$ [u,v,w] + [w,u,v] + [v,w,u] = 0 $$

$$ [u,v,[w,x,y]] = [[u,v,w],x,y] + [w,[u,v,x],y] + [w,x,[u,v,y]]. $$

([Jacobson 51, Eq. (1.7)-(1.11)](#Jacobson51), [Smirnov 09, 2.1](#Smirnov09))

The first two identities abstract the [[skew symmetry]] and [[Jacobi identity]] for the triple commutator in a [[Lie algebra]]. The third identity, which also holds for the triple commutator in a Lie algebra, says that the linear map $L_{u,v} \colon L \to L$ defined by $L_{u,v}(w) = [u,v,w]$, is a derivation of of the triple product, in the following sense:

$$ L_{u,v}[w,x,y] = [L_{u,v} w, x, y] + [w, L_{u,v} x, y] + [w, x, L_{u,v} y] .$$

The identity also implies that the space of linear operators 

$$ \mathfrak{g}_0 = \text{span}\{L_{u,v}: u, v \in V \} $$ 

is closed under commutators, hence a Lie algebra. ([Smirnov 09, 2.3](#Smirnov09))

## Relation to $\mathbb{Z}/2$-graded Lie algebras

Given any Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}$ and any linear subspace $V \subseteq \mathfrak{g}$ closed under the triple commutator

$$ [u,v,w] = [[u,v], w] ,$$

$V$ becomes a Lie triple system. Thus, given a $\mathbb{Z}/2$-graded Lie algebra (not a [[Lie superalgebra]], an ordinary Lie algebra with a $\mathbb{Z}/2$ grading), say $\mathfrak{g} = \mathfrak{g}_0 \oplus \mathfrak{g}_1$, the space $\mathfrak{g}_1$ of odd elements becomes a Lie triple system.   

Conversely, given any Lie triple system $V$, if we define 

$$ \mathfrak{g}_0 = \text{span}\{L_{u,v}: u, v \in V \} $$ 

$$ \mathfrak{g}_1 = V $$

then $\mathfrak{g} = \mathfrak{g}_0 \oplus \mathfrak{g}_1$ becomes a $\mathbb{Z}/2$-graded Lie algebra with bracket given by

$$ [(L,u),(M,v)] = ([L,M]+L_{u,v}, L(v) - M(u)) $$

for $L,M \in \mathfrak{g}_0, u,v \in \mathfrak{g}_1$. ([Smirnov 09, Corollary 3.4](#Smirnov09))

Let $\mathbf{LA}$ be the category of Lie algebras, $\mathbf{LA}_{\mathbb{Z}/2}$ be the category of $\mathbb{Z}/2$-graded Lie algebras and $\mathbf{LTS}$ be the category of Lie triple systems. The first construction (with $V=\mathfrak{g}$) defines a [[forgetful functor]] $\mathcal{T}\colon\mathbf{LA}\rightarrow\mathbf{LTS}$, which is a [[right adjoint]] functor. ([Jacobson 51](#Jacobson51), [Smirnov 09, 2.2.](#Smirnov09)) The first construction (with $V=\mathfrak{g}_1$) also defines a functor $\mathcal{R}\colon\mathbf{LA}_{\mathbb{Z}/2}\rightarrow\mathbf{LTS}$. The second contruction defines a [[faithful functor]] $\mathfrak{A}\colon\mathbf{LTS}\rightarrow\mathbf{LA}$ and even a [[fully faithful functor]] $\mathfrak{A}\colon\mathbf{LTS}\rightarrow\mathbf{LA}_{\mathbb{Z}/2}$, which gives an [[adjunction]]:
$$
\mathfrak{A}
\dashv\mathcal{R}.
$$

([Smirnov 09, 4.1](#Smirnov09))

This adjunction is not an [[equivalence of categories]], since any abelian $\mathbb{Z}/2$-graded Lie algebra (hence with vanishing [[Lie bracket]]) converted into a Lie triple system and back into a $\mathbb{Z}/2$-graded Lie algebra has a zero-dimensional space of even elements. Thus, the counit $\mathfrak{A}\mathcal{R}\Rightarrow Id$ is not a natural isomorphism. But since $\mathfrak{A}$ is [[fully faithful]], a suitable subcategory of $\mathbf{LA}_{\mathbb{Z}/2}$ makes the [[adjunction]] an [[equivalence of categories]], which is that of the $\mathbb{Z}/2$-graded Lie algebras $\mathfrak{g}=\mathfrak{g}_0\oplus\mathfrak{g}_1$, which are $0$-centrally closed (meaning every central $0$-extension of it splits) and generated by $\mathfrak{g}_1$ under the [[Lie bracket]]. ([Smirnov 09, Crl. 4.7 & 4.8](#Smirnov09))

## References


* {#Jacobson49} [[Nathan Jacobson]]: _Lie and Jordan triple systems_, American Journal of Mathematics __71__ (1949) 149–170 &lbrack;[jstor:2372102](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2372102)&rbrack; also in: *Nathan Jacobson, Collected Mathematical Papers*, Contemporary Mathematicians. Birkhäuser Boston (1989) &lbrack;[doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-3694-8_2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-3694-8_2)*rbrack;

* {#Jacobson51} [[Nathan Jacobson]]: _General representation theory of Jordan algebras_, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. **70** (1951) 509–530 &lbrack;[doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-3694-8_9](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-3694-8_9), [doi:10.2307/1990612](https://doi.org/10.2307/1990612), [jstor:1990612](https://www.jstor.org/stable/1990612)&rbrack;

* {#Smirnov09} Oleg Smirnov: _Imbedding of Lie triple systems into Lie algebras_, Journal of Algebra **341** 1 (2011) 1-12 &lbrack;[arxiv:0906.1170](https://arxiv.org/abs/0906.1170), [doi:10.1016/j.jalgebra.2011.06.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalgebra.2011.06.011)&rbrack;

In the context of [[Snyder spaces]]:

* {#Girelli10} [[Florian Girelli]]: _Snyder space-time: K-loop and Lie triple system_, SIGMA Symmetry Integrability Geom. Methods Appl. __6__ 074 (2010) &lbrack;[sigma:2010/074](http://www.emis.de/journals/SIGMA/2010/074), [pdf](http://www.emis.de/journals/SIGMA/2010/074/sigma10-074.pdf), [arxiv/1009.4762](http://arxiv.org/abs/1009.4762)&rbrack;


[[!redirects Lie triple systems]]



