pages/2/6/2/2/22262/content.md, before:


This page lists counterexamples in [[category theory]].


1. Taking the center of a group does not a define a functor from groups to abelian groups. 

1. Sending an object of a category to its automorphism group (or its endomorphism monoid) is not in general functorial.

1. Composing a [[monadic functor]] with another monadic functor need not be monadic. For example, Torsion-free abelian groups are monadic over abelian groups, which are monadic over sets, but torsion-free abelian groups are not monadic over sets. 

1. Taking the skeleton of a [[monoidal category]] does not in general result in a [[strict monoidal category]]. The argument in the case of Set is given in [this MO answer](https://mathoverflow.net/a/128629) In particular, one cannot in general replace a monoidal category with an equivalent category that is simultaneously  strict monoidal and skeletal. 

1. The category of topological spaces and [[local homeomorphism | local homeomorphisms]] is [[locally cartesian closed category | locally cartesian closed]] but not [[cartesian closed category | cartesian closed]] since it does not have a terminal object.

1. There are functors $D:Aff\to Vect$ and $A:Vect \to Aff$ between the categories of [[vector spaces]] and [[affine spaces]], and we have $D(A(V)) \cong V$ for any $V\in Vect$ and $A(D(U)) \cong U$ for any $U\in Aff$, but the categories are not [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] --- the second isomorphism is not natural.

 
## References

The initial import of counterexamples in this entry was taken from [this Zulip discussion](). See also [[counterexamples in algebra]].

Commit message:

Revision ID: 161258 Update date: 2021-03-14 20:51:35+00:00 Page name: counterexamples in category theory

pages/2/6/2/2/22262/content.md, after:

## Idea
In [[category theory]], there's often the sense that 'things just work', and that details can be skipped as everything is well behaved. Unfortunately, this is not quite true.

The counterexamples here should serve as specimens of possible pittfalls in category theory, and give an idea of what could go wrong.

## List

1. Taking the center of a group does not a define a functor from groups to abelian groups. 

1. Sending an object of a category to its [[automorphism]] group (or its [[endomorphism]] monoid) is not in general functorial.

1. Composing a [[monadic functor]] with another monadic functor need not be monadic. For example, Torsion-free abelian groups are monadic over abelian groups, which are monadic over sets, but torsion-free abelian groups are not monadic over sets. 

1. Taking the skeleton of a [[monoidal category]] does not in general result in a [[strict monoidal category]]. The argument in the case of Set is given in [this MO answer](https://mathoverflow.net/a/128629) In particular, one cannot in general replace a monoidal category with an equivalent category that is simultaneously  strict monoidal and skeletal. 

1. The category of topological spaces and [[local homeomorphism | local homeomorphisms]] is [[locally cartesian closed category | locally cartesian closed]] but not [[cartesian closed category | cartesian closed]] since it does not have a terminal object.

1. There are functors $D:Aff\to Vect$ and $A:Vect \to Aff$ between the categories of [[vector spaces]] and [[affine spaces]], and we have $D(A(V)) \cong V$ for any $V\in Vect$ and $A(D(U)) \cong U$ for any $U\in Aff$, but the categories are not [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] --- the second isomorphism is not natural.

1. The opposite of the category of commutative [[von Neumann algebra | von Neumann algebras]] has a [[subobject classifier]] and it's [[finitely complete category | finitely complete]], but is not a topos since it is not [[cartesian closed]]. See [this MO question](https://mathoverflow.net/questions/384346/is-the-opposite-category-of-commutative-von-neumann-algebras-a-topos).

1. There is a 'wrong right adjoint' to the functor $F : Petri \to CMC$ which sends a [[commutative monoidal category]] $C$ to the [[Petri net]] whose source and target are $\eta \circ s : Mor(C) \to \mathbb{N}[Ob(C)]$ and $\eta \circ t : Mor(C) \to \mathbb{N}[Ob(C)]$ where $s$ and $t$ are the source and target of $C$ and $\eta$ is the unit for the monad $\mathbb{N}[-]$. In words, $C$ is sent to the Petri net whose source and target are the [[source]] and [[target]] of $C$ composed with $\eta$. There is indeed an isomorphism $Hom(FA, B) \cong Hom(A, GB)$, where $G$ is the functor just described, but it is not [[natural transformation | natural]]. See Remark 4.4 in [Master 2020](#PN)

## See also

* [[counterexamples in algebra]]

## References

The initial import of counterexamples in this entry was taken from [this Zulip discussion](https://mattecapu.github.io/ct-zulip-archive/stream/229111-general/topic/Counterexamples.20in.20Category.20Theory.html).

* {#PN} [[Jade Master]], 2020, _[Petri nets based on Lawvere theories](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/mathematical-structures-in-computer-science/article/petri-nets-based-on-lawvere-theories/9E0F011860A1285DDC498B740774FBDC)_, Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 30(7), 833-864
