
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

### For ordinary mod $p$ cohomology

The [[associative algebra]] generated by the [[Steenrod square]] operations is called the _Steenrod algebra_ $A$, an [[associative algebra]] over the [[field]] $\mathbb{F}_2$. By [[Brown representability theorem]], this is the algebra 

$$
  H\mathbb{F}_p^\ast(H \mathbb{F}_p)
  \simeq
  [H \mathbb{F}_p,H \mathbb{F}_p]
$$

of the [[generalized cohomology theory]] applied to itself (the [[cohomology operations]]).

Dually there is the _dual Steenrod algebra_


$$
  H\mathbb{F}_\ast(H \mathbb{F}_p)
  \simeq
  H \mathbb{F}_p \wedge H \mathbb{F}_p
$$

given by applying this as a [[generalized homology theory]] to self.



### General

Steenrod algebra and its standard properties, such as the Adem relations
follow abstractly for the co-[[Tor]] groups of [[comodules]] over any [[Hopf algebroid]].

This is due to ([May 70, 11.8](#May70)). A review is in ([Ravenel, appendix 1, theorem A1.5.2](#Ravenel)).

## Properties

### Serre-Cartan basis

+-- {: .num_defn #SerreCartanBasis}
###### Definition

The _Serre-Cartan basis_ is the [[subset]] of elements of the Steenrod algebra on those of the form

$$
  Sq^{i_1} \circ Sq^{i_2} \circ \cdots \circ Sq^{i_n}
$$

where $i_k \in \mathbb{N}$ subject to the relation 

$$
  i_k \geq 2 i_{k+1}.
$$

=--

This is indeed a [[linear basis]] for the $\mathbb{F}_2$-[[vector space]] underlying the Steenrod algebra.

### Adem relations

+-- {: .num_prop #AdemRelations}
###### Proposition

The Steenrod square operations satisfy the following relation, for all 
for all $0 \lt i \lt 2 j$:

$$
  Sq^i \circ Sq^j 
   = 
  \sum_{k = 0}^{[i/2]}
  \left(
    \array{
      j - k - 1
      \\
      i - 2k 
    }
  \right)_{mod 2}
  Sq^{i + j -k} \circ Sq^k
$$

=--

These are called the **&#193;dem relations** ([&#193;dem 52](#Adem52)).

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition


The &#193;dam relations precisely generate the [[ideal]] of relations among the Serre-Cartan basis elements, def. \ref{AdemRelations}, in the Steenrod algebra.

=--


### Hopf algebroid structure
 {#HopfAlgebraStructure}

The Steenrod algebra for mod $p$ coefficients is a [[Hopf algebra]] over $\mathbb{F}_p$ which is graded commutative and non-co-commutative.

This is due to ([Milnor 58](#Milnor58)). A review is in [Ravenel, ch. 3, section 1](#Ravenel).


More generally, assume that a [[spectrum]] $E$ satisfies
some assumptions ([Ravenel, chapter 2, assumption 2.2.5](#Ravenel)

then $E_\bullet(E)$ is

* a [[bimodule]] over $\pi_\bullet(E)$

* an [[algebra]] and a [[coalgebra]] over $\pi_\bullet(E)$

such that

$(\pi_\bullet(E), E_\bullet(E))$ is a [[Hopf algebroid]]

and $E$-[[generalized homology]] refines to a functor to left $E_\bullet(E)$-[[comodules]].

([Ravenel, chapter 2, prop. 2.2.8](#Ravenel))

For instance if $E = $ [[MU]] then by [[Quillen's theorem on MU]] $\pi_\bullet(MU) \simeq L$ is the [[Lazard ring]] and the Hopf algebroid $(\pi_\bullet(MU), MU_\bullet(MU))$ is described by the [[Landweber-Novikov theorem]].

### Relation to Adams spectral sequence

By construction, the total [[cohomology]] $H^\bullet(X,\mathbb{Z}_2)$ of a [[topological space]] $X$, naturally is a [[module]] over the Steenrod algebra: 

an cohomology element is represented by a [[cocycle]] which is a map $X \longrightarrow B^n \mathbb{Z}_2$ and the action of a [[Steenrod square]] on this is just by [[composition]].

In this form the Steenrod algebra appears in the second page of the
[[Adams spectral sequence]] which computes $[\Sigma^\infty X, \Sigma^\infty Y]$ for [[topological spaces]] $X$ and $Y$: that second page is given by the [[Ext]]-groups

$$
  E_2 = Ext_A(H^\bullet(X, \mathbb{Z}_2), H^\bullet(Y,\mathbb{Z}_2))
$$

computed in the [[category of modules|category of A-modules]] for $A$ the Steenrod algebra.

## Related concepts

* [[Pi-algebra]]

* [[Adams resolution]], [[Adams spectral sequence]], [[Adams-Novikov spectral sequence]]

## References

Original articles include

* [[Norman Steenrod]], D. B. A., Epstein, _Cohomology operations_, Ann. of Math. Studies, no. 50, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1962.

* [[José Ádem]], _The iteration of the Steenrod squares in algebraic topology_ , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 38: 720&#8211;726 (1952)
 {#Adem52}

* [[John Milnor]], _The Steenrod algebra and its dual_, Ann. of Math. 67 (1958), 150&#8211;171.
 {#Milnor58}


The general algebraic approach was laid out in 

* [[Peter May]], _A general algebraic approach to Steenrod operations_, in _The Steenrod Algebra and its Applications_ (Proc. Conf. to Celebrate N. E. Steenrod's Sixtieth Birthday, Battelle Memorial Inst., Columbus, Ohio, 1970), Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 168, Springer, Berlin, 1970, pp. 153&#8211;231. ([pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/BOOKS/Algebraic.pdf))
 {#May70}

* R. R. Bruner, , [[Peter May]], J. E. McClure, M. Steinberger, 
_$H_\infty$ ring spectra and their applications_, Lecture Notes in Math., Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

Textbook accounts include

* Harvey Margolis, _Spectra and the Steenrod algebra_, 1983 North-Holland 

Lecture notes include

* [[Jacob Lurie]], 18.917 _[Topics in Algebraic Topology: The Sullivan Conjecture, Fall 2007](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-917-topics-in-algebraic-topology-the-sullivan-conjecture-fall-2007)_. (MIT OpenCourseWare: Massachusetts Institute of Technology), _[Lecture notes](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-917-topics-in-algebraic-topology-the-sullivan-conjecture-fall-2007/lecture-notes/)_

  Lecture 2 _Steenrod operations_ ([pdf](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-917-topics-in-algebraic-topology-the-sullivan-conjecture-fall-2007/lecture-notes/lecture2.pdf))

  Lecture 3 _Basic properties of Steenrod operations_ ([pdf](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-917-topics-in-algebraic-topology-the-sullivan-conjecture-fall-2007/lecture-notes/lecture3.pdf))

  Lecture 4 _The Adem relations_ ([pdf](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-917-topics-in-algebraic-topology-the-sullivan-conjecture-fall-2007/lecture-notes/lecture4.pdf))

  Lecture 5 _The Adem relations (cont.)_ ([pdf](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-917-topics-in-algebraic-topology-the-sullivan-conjecture-fall-2007/lecture-notes/lecture5.pdf))


Reviews include

* [[Doug Ravenel]], _[[Complex cobordism and stable homotopy groups of spheres]]_
 {#Ravenel}

(appendix 1, section 5 reviews the abstract algebraic definition).

* Cary Malkievich, _The Steenrod Algebra_ ([pdf](http://math.stanford.edu/~carym/steenrod.pdf))

On the dual Steenrod algebra:

* J. Palmieri, _Some quotient Hopf algebras of the dual Steenrod algebra_ ([pdf](http://www.math.washington.edu/~palmieri/Papers/quotient.pdf))

For a commented list of furhter references see also

* _[Steenrod algebra learning seminar](http://www.math.uwo.ca/~sisaacso/steenrod-seminar/steenrod.xhtml)_

See also

* [online Adem relation calculator](http://math.berkeley.edu/~aaron/adem/)

[[!redirects Steenrod algebras]]

[[!redirects Adem relation]]
[[!redirects Ádem relation]]
[[!redirects Adem relations]]
[[!redirects Ádem relations]]