pages/7/4/2/6/16247/content.md, before:


> under construction

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Graph theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include graph theory - contents]]
=--
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A [[Dynkin diagram]] is a labeled graph that possesses a one-to-one correspondence with a finite indecomposable reduced [[root system]], thus with a simple complex finite dimensional [[Lie algebra]] or [[Cartan matrix]]. 

The construction of a [[Dynkin diagram]] from the [[Cartan Matrix]], $A = (a_{i,j})_{i,j=1}^n$ is obtained from the following procedure:

1. Number of vertices = Number of simple roots = size of $A$ = n

2. If $a_{i,j} = a_{i,j} = -1$ then $i,j$ are connected by a nonlabeled edge.

3. If $a_{i,j} = -1$ and  $a_{j,i} = -l$ then $i,j$ are connected by $l$ arrows labeled by <. 

## Properties

### Dynkin Index

Let $\mathcal{g}$ be a finite simple complex [[Lie algebra]] with a [[Killing form]] $k$ on $\mathcal{g}$ given by the trace in the adjoint representation,
$k(x,y) = Tr R_{ad}(x)R_{ad}(y)$ for $x,y \in \mathcal{g}$. 

For any irreducible finite representation $R_{\lambda}$ of $\mathcal{g}$, 
$TrR_\lambda(x)R_\lambda(y) = I_\lambda k(x,y)$
Where $I_\lambda$ is the _Dynkin Index_ of $R_\lambda$.


### Classification of simple Lie groups

[[classification of simple Lie groups]]:

<center>
<img src="http://jakobschwichtenberg.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/dynkinclassification.jpg">
</center>

> graphics grabbed from [Schwichtenberg](http://jakobschwichtenberg.com/classification-of-simple-lie-groups/)

### ADE-Classification

Those Dynkin diagrams in the [[ADE classification]] are the following

<center>
<img src="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/ADEDynkin.jpg" width="490"/>
</center>

[[!include ADE -- table]]

## Related concepts

* [[Dynkin quiver]]

* [[ADE classification]]

## References

* Bianchi M. et al. (2004) Dynkin Index. In: Duplij S., Siegel W., Bagger J. (eds) Concise Encyclopedia of Supersymmetry. Springer, Dordrecht. _[publisher](https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020-4522-0_169)_

* Wikipedia, _[Dynkin diagram](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynkin_diagram)_

[[!redirects Dynkin diagrams]]

[[!redirects simply laced Dynkin diagram]]
[[!redirects simply laced Dynkin diagrams]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 166182 Update date: 2021-07-06 23:45:37+00:00 Page name: Dynkin diagram

pages/7/4/2/6/16247/content.md, after:


> under construction

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Graph theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include graph theory - contents]]
=--
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A [[Dynkin diagram]] is a labeled graph that possesses a one-to-one correspondence with a finite indecomposable reduced [[root system]], thus with a simple complex finite dimensional [[Lie algebra]] or [[Cartan matrix]]. 

The construction of a [[Dynkin diagram]] from the [[Cartan Matrix]], $A = (a_{i,j})_{i,j=1}^n$ is obtained from the following procedure:

1. Number of vertices = Number of simple roots = size of $A$ = n

2. If $a_{i,j} = a_{i,j} = -1$ then $i,j$ are connected by a nonlabeled edge.

3. If $a_{i,j} = -1$ and  $a_{j,i} = -l$ then $i,j$ are connected by $l$ arrows labeled by <. 

## Properties

### Dynkin Index

Let $\mathcal{g}$ be a finite simple complex [[Lie algebra]] with a [[Killing form]] $k$ on $\mathcal{g}$ given by the trace in the adjoint representation,
$k(x,y) = Tr R_{ad}(x)R_{ad}(y)$ for $x,y \in \mathcal{g}$. 

For any irreducible finite representation $R_{\lambda}$ of $\mathcal{g}$, 
$TrR_\lambda(x)R_\lambda(y) = I_\lambda k(x,y)$
Where $I_\lambda$ is the _Dynkin Index_ of $R_\lambda$.

The Dynkin index can also be defined in terms of the eigenvalue $C_\lambda$ of the quadratic [[Casimir operator]]:
$ I_\lambda = \frac{dim(R_\lambda)}{dim(\mathcal{g}}C_\lambda $.



### Classification of simple Lie groups

[[classification of simple Lie groups]]:

<center>
<img src="http://jakobschwichtenberg.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/dynkinclassification.jpg">
</center>

> graphics grabbed from [Schwichtenberg](http://jakobschwichtenberg.com/classification-of-simple-lie-groups/)

### ADE-Classification

Those Dynkin diagrams in the [[ADE classification]] are the following

<center>
<img src="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/ADEDynkin.jpg" width="490"/>
</center>

[[!include ADE -- table]]

## Related concepts

* [[Dynkin quiver]]

* [[ADE classification]]

## References

* Bianchi M. et al. (2004) Dynkin Index. In: Duplij S., Siegel W., Bagger J. (eds) Concise Encyclopedia of Supersymmetry. Springer, Dordrecht. _[publisher](https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020-4522-0_169)_

* Wikipedia, _[Dynkin diagram](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynkin_diagram)_

[[!redirects Dynkin diagrams]]

[[!redirects simply laced Dynkin diagram]]
[[!redirects simply laced Dynkin diagrams]]
