
#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}


## Idea

In first-order [[logic]], a **theory** $\mathcal{T}$ is presented by 

* a [[signature (in logic)|signature]] $\Sigma$

* a set of axioms $A$ expressed in the first-order language $Lang(\Sigma)$ with equality generated by $\Sigma$ 

There are several different viewpoint on theories:

* The **syntactic view** is that the theory itself consists of the set of formulas in $Lang(\Sigma)$ together with the set of logical consequences (aka theorems) of the axioms in $A$, relative to (some specified) fragment of first-order logic. 

* The **semantic view** is that the theory is given by the class of its [[model]]s appropriate to that fragment of logic. G&#246;del's completeness theorem is that a sentence in $\mathcal{T}$ is a theorem iff it is satisfied in every model.  

* The **categorical view** is that the logical formalism of a theory $\mathcal{T}$ can frequently be embodied in a [[syntactic category]] of terms $C_{\mathcal{T}}$, so that models of a theory $\mathcal{T}$ are identified with [[functor]]s 

  $$C_{\mathcal{T}} \to Set$$ 

  that preserve some (typically [[stuff, structure, property|property-like]]) [[stuff, structure, property|structures]] on $C_{\mathcal{T}}$, such as certain classes of [[colimit]]s or of [[limits]], pertinent to the fragment of logic at hand. Then a completeness theorem would be the statement that the canonical map 

  $$C_{\mathcal{T}} \to \prod_{models F in Set} Set$$ 

  is a [[full and faithful functor|full faithful embedding]] (one that preserves all relevant logical structure). For this reason, completeness theorems are also known as _embedding theorems_. 

+--{.query}
Hm, is that the way it should be said?
=--

In fact, the notion of model can be generalized away from $Set$ to more general  [[categories]], namely those that have enough structure to "internalize" the fragment of logic at hand. From this very general point of view on model, the syntactic category $C_{\mathcal{T}}$ is the generic or universal model for $\mathcal{T}$, and if we simply call $C_{\mathcal{T}}$ the theory, then models and theories are placed on the same footing. 

In this article we mostly consider the categorical view on "theory".

## Examples 

### Classes of theories

There are many different kinds of "theory" depending on the strength of the "logic": a by-no-means complete list includes equational logic, Horn logic, essentially algebraic logic, geometric logic, regular logic, exact logic, extensive logic, coherent logic, first-order (aka pretopos) logic, and corresponding theories for these logics. 

Interestingly, one form of logic which made an early appearance but is not ordinarily thought of as logic at all is the logic of abelian categories, which is characterized by certain exactness properties. Here a small abelian category $A$ can be thought of as a syntactic site for some "abelian theory"; models of the theory are exact additive functors with domain $A$. The classical models would in fact be exact additive functors $A \to Ab$, or exact additive functors to a category of modules. A "Freyd-Heron-Lubkin-Mitchell" embedding theorem is then a completeness theorem with respect to the classical models, and assures us that a statement in the language of abelian category theory is provable if and only if it is true when interpreted in any module category. 


Here is a list of examples of theories that have their own $n$Lab entries:

* [[essentially algebraic theory]]

* [[algebraic theory]]

  * [[commutative algebraic theory]]

  * finitary algebraic theory: [[Lawvere theory]]

    * [[Fermat theory]]

* [[geometric theory]]


### Specific examples

* the theories 

  * $Th(Cat)$ of [[categories]]

  * $Th(Lex)$ of [[finitely complete categories]]

  * $Th(Topos)$ of [[elementary toposes]]

  * $Th(ETCS)$ of [[set]]s ([[ETCS]])

  are discussed at [[fully formal ETCS]].


## Models for a theory


From the categorical point of view, for every theory $T$ there exists a [[category]] $C_T$ -- the  **[[syntactic category]]** $C_T$ -- such that a model for $T$ is a [[functor]] $C_T \to \mathcal{T}$ into some [[topos]] $T$, satisfying certain conditions.

For instance the syntactic categories of [[Lawvere theory|Lawvere theories]] are precisely those categories that have finite cartesian [[product]]s and in which every object is [[isomorphic]] to a finite cartesian power $x^n$ of a distinguished object $x$. A model for a Lawvere theory is precisely a finite product preserving functor $C_T \to \mathcal{T}$.

We say a functor $\mathcal{T}_1 \to \mathcal{T}_2$ of toposes (for instance a [[logical morphism]] or a [[geometric morphism]]) _preserves a theory_ $T$ if for every model $C_T \to \mathcal{T}_1$ of $T$ in $\mathcal{T}_1$, the composite $C_T \to \mathcal{T}_1 \to \mathcal{T}_2$ is a model of $T$ in $\mathcal{T}_2$.

For instance, every [[geometric morphism]] preserves every [[Lawvere theory]] since, being a [[right adjoint]], it preserves [[limit]]s, hence finite products.

## Links and literature

* n-category cafe 2010: [what is a theory](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2010/07/what_is_a_theory.html)
* [[Mamuka Jibladze]], [[Teimuraz Pirashvili]], _Cohomology of algebraic theories_, J. Algebra  __137__ (1991),  no. 2, 253--296, <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-8693(91)90093-N">doi</a>
* wikipedia: [list of first-order theories](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_first-order_theories), [Morley's categoricity theorem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morley%27s_categoricity_theorem), [Decidability (logic)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decidability_%28logic%29), [signature (logic)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signature_%28logic%29)

[[!redirects theories]]