
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

**Kripke-Joyal semantics** is a higher order generalization of the semantic interpretation proposed initially by Beth, Gregorczyk, and Kripke for [[intuitionistic logic|intuitionistic predicate logic]]. It provides a notion of _'local truth'_ or _'validity at a stage'_ in a [[topos]].

Since it is closely related to [[Paul Cohen|Paul Cohen's]] [[forcing]] technique in [[set theory]], a connection that was already observed by Gregorczyk and Kripke, it is sometimes called _forcing_ semantics. Other terms in use for it are _external_ semantics , _cover_ semantics or _Beth-Kripke-Joyal_ semantics.

By giving a semantics to formulas written in the [[higher-order logic|higher-order]] [[type theory]] used to express [[ordinary mathematics]] in a topos, the Kripke-Joyal semantics serves as [[semantics|semantic]] interface between the [[internalisation|internal (syntactic) description]] of mathematical objects using the [[Mitchell–Bénabou language]] and the external description.  

Kripke-Joyal semantics provide rules and prescriptions for semantic interpretation for general toposes but these prescriptions may simplify for special classes of toposes e.g. the rules resulting for [[presheaf toposes]] over posets (when restricted to first-order formulas) correspond to the original notion of model for IPL considered by [[Saul Kripke|Kripke]] et al.

## Lawvere on Kripke-Joyal semantics

> To workers in algebraic geometry and analysis, it may appear somewhat excessive to detour through an elaborate Mitchell-B&#233;nabou language which in turn requires a Kripke-Joyal semantics in order to get back at the mathematical content of a specific topos. (That sometimes-recommended procedure is strictly analogous to defining a group to be the quotient of the free group generated by itself, which analogously is sometimes useful). The key clause in that semantics was presupposed in the title 'Quantifiers and Sheaves', but the linear case was a theorem in Godement 1958 and indeed just expresses in terms of the 20th century concepts the content of Volterra's local existence theorem. Briefly,

> a) the rule of inference for existential quantification is just a symbolic expression of the universal property enjoyed by the geometric image of any map (not only in the category of sets where the axiom of choice holds, but) in any topos,

> b) a figure lying in such an image comes in fact only locally from figures in the domain of the map.

Lawvere ([2000](#Law00), pp.717f).

## Related concepts

* [[Mitchell–Bénabou language]]

* [[internal logic]]

* [[semantics]]

* [[stack semantics]]

* [[forcing]]

## References

For the origins in the semantics of intuitionistic logic consult

* E. W. Beth, _Semantic construction of intuitionistic logic_ , Mededel. Kon. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Afd. letterkunde N. S. **19** no.13 (1956) pp.357-388.

* A. Grzegorczyk, _A philosophically plausible formal interpretation of intuitionistic logic_ , Indagationes Mathematicae **26** (1964) pp.596&#8211;601.

* [[Saul Kripke|S. A. Kripke]], _Semantical analysis of intuitionistic logic I_ , pp.92-130 in Crossley, Dummett (eds.), _Formal Systems and Recursive Functions_ , North-Holland Amsterdam 1965.

* H. C. M. de Swart, _An intuitionistically plausible interpretation of intuitionistic logic_ , JSL **42** no. 4 (1977) pp.564-578.

* W. Veldman, _An intuitionistic completeness theorem for intuitionistic predicate calculus_ , JSL **41** no. 1 (1976) pp.159-166.

A (non-categorical) textbook presentation of the original Kripke semantics can be found in

* [[John Lane Bell|J. Bell]], M. Machover, _A Course in Mathematical Logic_ , North-Holland Amsterdam 1977. (section IX.6 pp.416-422)

A more recent overview is in

* D. van Dalen, _Intuitionistic Logic_ , pp.224-257 in Goble (ed.), _The Blackwell Guide to Philosophical Logic_ , Oxford 2001. (pp.237-240)

The topos-theoretic generalization is usually attributed to [[André Joyal]] who observed in the early 70s that this topos semantics subsumes various notions of forcing but his work was apparently not published. Early references are

* [[Gerhard Osius|G. Osius]], _The internal and external aspect of logic and set theory in elementary topoi_ , Cah. Top. G&#233;om. Diff. Cat. **XV**  no. 2 (1974) pp.157-180. ([numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CTGDC_1974__15_2_157_0))
   
* [[Gerhard Osius|G. Osius]], _A note on Kripke-Joyal semantics for the internal language of topoi_ , Springer LNM **445** (1975) pp.349-354.

The following texts stress the connection to Cohen and Kripke's work

* [[F. William Lawvere]], _Variable sets etendu and variable structure in topoi_ , Lecture notes University of Chicago 1975.

* {#Lawvere76}[[F. William Lawvere]], _Variable quantities and variable structures in topoi_ , pp.101-131 in Heller, Tierney (eds.), Algebra, Topology and Category Theory, Academic Press New York 1976. 

Most textbooks on topos theory have a section on Kripke-Joyal semantics. Particularly thorough are 

* [[Francis Borceux]], _Handbook of Categorical Algebra vol.3_ , Cambridge UP 1994. (section 6.6)

* [[Saunders MacLane]], [[Ieke Moerdijk]], _[[Sheaves in Geometry and Logic]]_ , Springer Heidelberg 1994. (section VI.6-7)

Freely available online are

* {#Goldblatt84} R. Goldblatt, _Topoi - The Categorical Analysis of Logic_ , 2nd ed. North-Holland Amsterdam 1984. (Dover reprint New York 2006; [project euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.bia/1403013939), section XIV.6)

* [[Ieke Moerdijk]],  [[Jaap van Oosten]], _Topos theory_, lecture notes (2007). ([pdf](http://www.staff.science.uu.nl/~ooste110/syllabi/toposmoeder.pdf), page 58ff)

The above Lawvere quote stems from

* {#Law00}F. W. Lawvere, _Comments on the development of topos theory_ , pp.715-734 in Pier (ed.), _Development of Mathematics 1950-200_ , Birkh&#228;user Basel 2000. Reprinted as TAC reprint **24** (2014) pp.1-22.  ([TAC](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/reprints/articles/24/tr24abs.html)) 


A generalization to [[quantales]] is in

* R. Goldblatt, _A Kripke-Joyal Semantics for Noncommutative Logic in Quantales_ , pp.209-225 in Governatori, Hodkinson, Venema (eds.), _Avances in Model Logic vol. 6_ , College Publications London 2006. ([draft](http://www.mcs.vuw.ac.nz/~rob/papers/aiml11printed.pdf))

For a philosophical assessment and comparison to ordinary Tarski semantics see

* J. Petitot, _La Neige est Blanche ssi... Pr&#233;dication et Perception_ , Math. Inf. Sci. Hum **35** no.140 (1997) pp.35-50. ([pdf](http://archive.numdam.org/article/MSH_197_140_35_0.pdf))

An illustration of the Kripke-Joyal semantics at work is

* J. Weinberger, _The cubical model of type theory_ , M. Sc. thesis TU Darmstadt 2016. ([pdf](http://www.mathematik.tu-darmstadt.de/~streicher/THESES/weinberger.pdf))

[[!redirects Kripke model]]
[[!redirects Kripke models]]

[[!redirects Beth-Kripke-Joyal semantics]]
[[!redirects Kripke-Joyal semantics]]
[[!redirects Kripke–Joyal semantics]]
[[!redirects Kripke--Joyal semantics]]

[[redirects external semantics]]
