An __operator algebra__ is any subalgebra of the algebra of continuous linear operators on a [[topological vector space]], with composition as the multiplication. The space is which in most cases a separable [[Hilbert space]], and most attention has been historically to algebras of bounded linear operators. The operator algebras themselves are often equipped with their own topologies (e.g. norm topology, weak topology, $*$-weak topology and so on) and sometimes involution. __$C^*$-algebras__ are norm-closed complex $*$-subalgebras of the algebra of the bounded linear operators on a separable complex Hilbert space. They can be however characterized structurally as a $*$-representation of a complex Banach algebra with involution satisfying some compatibility conditions; the latter could be called abstract $C^*$-algebras. Every _commutative_ unital $C^*$-algebra can be realized as an algebra of functions on a Hausdorff compact space, which is obtained as its [[Gel'fand spectrum]].

Special class of $C^*$-algebras are __von Neumann__ or $W^*$-algebras (see [wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann_algebra)), which are _weakly closed_ (=closed in weak topology) $*$-subalgebras of the complex algebra of bounded linear operators on Hilbert space. In structural theory, important role among von Neumann algebras play so-called factors, characteriyed by the property that their center is trivial (=1-dimensional; consisting of "scalars"). 

Operator algebras play major roles in functional analysis, [[representation theory]], [[noncommutative geometry]] and  quantum field theory. 

[[!redirects operator algebras]]