+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Manifolds and cobordisms
+--{: .hide}
[[!include manifolds and cobordisms - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

\tableofcontents

## Idea


*Pin⁻ bordism* is the [[B-bordism]] theory for manifolds with pin⁻ [[tangential structure]] ([[(B,f)-structure]]). This is defined to be a lift of the principal $O_n$-bundle of frames across the double cover $\mathrm{Pin}_n^-\to O_n$. This can also be characterized using [[Stiefel-Whitney class|Stiefel-Whitney classes]] as follows:
\begin{lemma}([Stolz 1988](#Stolz88), Corollary 6.4)
\label{w2_pinm}
A vector bundle $V\to X$ has a pin⁻ structure if and only if $w_2(V) = w_1(V)^2$ in $H^2(X;\mathbb{Z}/2)$.
\end{lemma}


## Non-additivity

Lemma \ref{w2_pinm} and the [[Whitney sum formula]] imply that, in general, the direct sum of two vector bundles with pin⁻ structures is not pin⁻, due to the presence of $w_1$ cross terms in the formula for $w_2$ of a direct sum. This has a few consequences.

- The direct product of two pin⁻ manifolds need not have a pin⁺ structure: $\mathbb{RP}^2$ is pin⁻, but $\mathbb{RP}^2\times\mathbb{RP}^2$ is not. Usually bordism rings are defined using the direct product, so the pin⁻ bordism groups $\Omega_*^{\mathrm{Pin}^-}$ cannot be made into a graded ring in the usual way. (In fact, they cannot be made into a graded ring at all; see below.)
- If $V\to X$ is a pin⁻ vector bundle, the virtual bundle $-V\to X$ does not in general admit a pin⁻ structure, but rather a pin⁺ structure. Thus, a manifold admits a pin⁻ structure on its [[tangent bundle]] if and only if its [[stable normal bundle]] admits a pin⁺ structure! See [Giambalvo](#Giambalvo73), §1.

Analogous facts are true for generic $(B, f)$-structures, but with the exception of pin⁺ and pin⁻ structures, the most commonly studied tangential structures do not have this issue.

The inequivalence of pin⁻ structures on the tangent and stable normal bundles has an important consequence for bordism theory. The [[Pontryagin-Thom theorem]] identifying bordism groups with homotopy groups of the corresponding [[Thom spectrum]] uses $(B, f)$-structures on the _stable normal bundle_, not the tangent bundle, but pin⁻ structures on manifolds are defined on the tangent bundle. As stated above, a pin⁻ structure on the tangent bundle is equivalent to a pin⁺ structure on the stable normal bundle, so the Thom spectrum whose homotopy groups are the pin⁺ bordism groups is MPin⁺!

It is common in the literature to, given $f\colon B\to BO$, to define the _Madsen-Tillmann spectrum_ MTB to be the Thom spectrum of $f$ precomposed with the map $-1\colon BO\to BO$. Thus the homotopy groups of MTB are naturally isomorphic to the bordism groups of manifolds with $(B, f)$-structures on their tangent bundles.

With this notation, MTPin⁻ = MPin⁺.

## Pin⁻ bordism groups

[Anderson-Brown-Peterson](#AndersonBrownPeterson69) computed the pin⁻ bordism groups. [Kirby-Taylor](#KTgeo) calculate through $\Omega_4$ using arguments from geometric topology.

* $\Omega_0^{Pin^-}\cong \mathbb{Z}/2$
* $\Omega_1^{Pin^-}\cong \mathbb{Z}/2$
* $\Omega_2^{Pin^-}\cong\mathbb{Z}/8$
* $\Omega_3^{Pin^-}\cong 0$
* $\Omega_4^{Pin^-}\cong 0$
* $\Omega_5^{Pin^-}\cong 0$
* $\Omega_6^{Pin^-}\cong \mathbb{Z}/16$
* $\Omega_7^{Pin^-}\cong 0$
* $\Omega_8^{Pin^-} \cong \mathbb{Z}/2$.

As a corollary, $\Omega_*^{Pin^-}$ cannot be a graded ring: in any graded ring, the degree-$n$ elements are a module over the degree-$0$ ones, but $\Omega_2^{Pin^-}$ is not a $\mathbb{Z}/2$-module.

## Properties

As discussed above, the direct sum of two pin⁻ vector bundles does not in general have a pin⁻ structure. However, the direct sum of a pin⁻ vector bundle and a spin vector bundle has a canonical pin⁻ structure. This implies the following:
\begin{proposition}
$\Omega_*^{Pin^-}$ is a [[module]] over the [[spin bordism]] ring $\Omega^Spin$.
\end{proposition}

\begin{proposition}([Giambalvo](#Giambalvo73), Theorem 3.4 and Corollary 3.5)

1. For all $n\ge 0$, there is a $\mathbb{Z}/2^{4n+3}$ summand of $\Omega_{8n+2}^{Pin^-}$, generated by the bordism class of $\mathbb{RP}^{8n+2}$ with either of its two pin⁻ structures.
2. For all $n\ge 0$, there is a $\mathbb{Z}/2^{4n+4}$ summand of $\Omega_{8n+6}^{Pin^-}$, generated by the bordism class of $\mathbb{RP}^{8n+6}$ with either of its two pin⁻ structures.
3. Modulo the $\Omega_*^{\mathrm{Spin}}$-submodule of $\Omega_*^{Pin^-}$ generated by the above classes, the pin⁻ bordism groups are $\mathbb{Z}/2$-[[vector spaces]].

\end{proposition}

## Related entries

[[!include flavours of cobordism cohomology theories -- table]]

## References

* {#AndersonBrownPeterson69} [[D.W. Anderson]], [[E.H. Brown, Jr.]], and [[F.P. Peterson]], _Pin cobordism and related topics_, Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici **44**, 1969, &lbrack;[doi:10.1007/BF02564545](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02564545)&rbrack;

* {#Giambalvo73} [[Vince Giambalvo]]: _Pin and Pin' cobordism_, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. **39** (2), 1973, &lbrack;[doi:10.2307/2039653](https://doi.org/10.2307/2039653)&rbrack;

* {#Stolz88} [[Stephan Stolz]]: _Exotic structures on 4-manifolds detected by spectral invariants_, Invent. Math. **94** (1988) 147&ndash;162 &lbrack;[doi:10.1007/BF01394348](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01394348), [pdf](https://webhomes.maths.ed.ac.uk/~v1ranick/papers/stolz3.pdf)&rbrack;

* {#KirbyTaylor90} [[Robion Kirby]], [[Laurence Taylor]]: _A calculation of $Pin^+$ bordism groups_, Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici **65** (1990) 434–447 &lbrack;[doi:10.1007/BF02566617](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF02566617), [pdf](https://math.berkeley.edu/~kirby/papers/Kirby%20and%20Taylor%20-%20A%20calculation%20of%20Pin%5E+%20bordism%20groups%20-%20MR1069818.pdf)&rbrack;

* {#KTGeo} [[Robion Kirby]], [[Laurence Taylor]]: Pin structures on low-dimensional manifolds. In _Geometry of Low-Dimensional Manifolds 2: Symplectic Manifolds and Jones-Witten Theory_, Cambridge University Press, 1991. &lbrack;[doi:10.1017/CBO9780511629341.015](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511629341.015), [pdf](https://math.berkeley.edu/~kirby/papers/Kirby%20and%20Taylor%20-%20Pin%20structures%20on%20low-dimensional%20manifolds%20-%20MR1171915.pdf)&rbrack;


[[!redirects pin- bordism]]
[[!redirects Pin⁻ bordism]]
[[!redirects Pin- bordism]]