
#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Definition

A **finite group** is a [[group]] whose underlying [[set]] is [[finite set|finite]].

This is equivalently a [[group object]] in [[FinSet]].

## Classification

The structure of finite groups is a very hard problem; the classification of finite [[simple group]]s alone is one of the largest theorems ever proved (certainly if measured by number of journal pages needed for a complete proof).  

All finite groups are built out of [[simple group]]s, but the ways to do this have not (yet?) been fully classified.

A point of view that can be useful in particular cases -- more useful than the [Jordan-H\"older Theorem] is provided by the [$F^*$-Theorem], due to Hans Fitting in the solvable case and Helmut Bender in the general case. It states that $C_G(F^*(G))=Z(F^*(G))$, where $F^*(G)$ is the [generalized Fitting subgroup] of $G$, defined below, $C_G(F^*(G))$ is the subgroup of $G$ consisting of all elements commuting with every element of $F^*(G)$, and $Z(H)$ for any group $H$ is the center of $H$, the subgroup of $H$ consisting of all elements commuting with every element of $H$. Thus $G$ is somehow assembled from $F^*(G)$, whose structure has some easy features, and $G/C_G(F^*(G))$, which is isomorphic to a subgroup of the automorphism group of $F^*(G)$ and which has a quotient group isomorphic to $G/F^*(G)$. 

One definition of $F^*(G)$ is that it is the subgroup generated by all normal subgroups $N$ of $G$ possessing subgroups $N_1,N_2,\dots, N_r$ for some integer $r$ such that $N=N_1N_2\cdots N_r$; $x_i x_j=x_j x_i$ for all $x_i\in N_i$, $x_j\in N_j$, and distinct subscripts $i$ and $j$; and each $N_i$ either has prime power order or is a quasisimple group. Bender proved that $F^*(G)$ itself enjoys these properties. Finally a group $H$ is called quasisimple if and only if $H=[H,H]$ and $H/Z(H)$ is simple. The finite quasisimple groups have been classified, as a consequence of the classification of finite simple groups and the calculation of the [Schur multiplier] of each finite simple group. 

For more on this see

* [[classification of finite simple groups]].

## Examples

* For every [[natural number]] $n \in \mathbb{N}$, the group
  
  $$
    \mathbb{Z}_n := \mathbb{Z}/n \mathbb{Z}
  $$

  which is the quotient of the additive group of [[integer]]s by its action on itself my multiplication with multiples of $n$ is a finite group.

* The largest finite group that is also a [[sporadic simple group]], i.e., does not belong(up to isomorphism) to the infinite family of the alternating groups or to the infinite family of finite groups of Lie type, is the [[Monster group]].