
#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}


## Idea ##

We may define K&#228;hler differentials $\Omega^1_K(A)$ for any [[commutative algebra]] $A$.  When $A$ is an algebra of smooth functions on some space you know and love, K&#228;hler differentials tend to act roughly like 1-forms on this space.  Indeed, when $A$ consists of the algebraic functions on an affine [[algebraic variety]], K&#228;hler differentials are often taken as a _definition_ of 1-forms.  When $A$ consists of smooth functions on a manifold, the K&#228;hler differentials do not agree with the ordinary smooth 1-forms on this manifold.  However, there is a map from the K&#228;hler differentials to the ordinary 1-forms.

Conceptually, a symmetry of a commutative algebra $A$ is an [[automorphism]] $g\colon A\to A$, i.e., $g(a b)=g(a)g(b)$. The 'infinitesimal' symmetries are the [[derivations]] $X\colon A\to A$, with $X(a b)=X(a)b+X(a)b$. The [[module]] of K&#228;hler differentials $\Omega^1_K(A)$  parametrizes derivations, in the sense that every derivation $X$ corresponds uniquely to a morphism of $A$-modules $\mu_X: \Omega_K^1 (A)\to A$. 

## Definition ##

Suppose $A$ is a [[commutative algebra]] over a field $k$.   We may define K&#228;hler differentials either by an explicit construction or by a universal property. In fact there are two explicit constructions.

The simplest construction, maybe, is as follows. The module of **K&#228;hler differentials** $\Omega^1_K(A)$ over $A$ is generated by symbols $d a$ for all $a\in A$, subject to these relations:

* $d c = 0$ when $c$ is a 'constant', that is, an element of $k$ regarded as an element of $A$.

* $d(a b)=(d a)b+a(d b)$.

* $d(a+b)=d a+d b$.

* $(d a)b = b(d a)$.

In particular there are only finite sums in the module of K&#228;hler differentials.  

Another more sophisticated construction of $\Omega^1_K(A)$ is given below.  But turning to the universal property, note that we can define **derivations** from $A$ to any $A$-[[module]] $M$: they are $k$-linear maps $X : A \to M$ satisfying the product rule:

$$ X(a b) = X(a) b + a X(b) $$

Then $\Omega^1_K(A)$ may be defined as the [[universal property|universal]] $A$-module equipped with a derivation.  In other words, there is a derivation 

$$d : A \to \Omega^1_K(A), $$

and if $X:A\to M$ is any [[derivation]] from $A$ to some $A$-module $M$, then there is a unique $A$-module morphism 

$$\mu_X:\Omega_K^1(A)\to M$$

such that the following diagram commutes:

$$
\array{
A&\overset{X}\to     & M\\
 & \underset{d}\searr&\uparrow \mu_X\\
 &                   & \Omega_K^1{A}
}
$$

We say that $X$ **factors through** $d$.


## Generalization ##

We can replace the commutative algebra $A$ more generally by  a [[morphism]] of [[commutative unital rings]] $f:R\to S$. Then the __module of K&#228;hler differentials__ is the $S$-[[module]] $\Omega^1_K(S/R)$ corepresenting the functor

$$Der_R(S,f_*(-)) : S Mod\to Set : M\mapsto Der_R(S,f_* M)$$

that assigns to every $S$-[[module]] $M$ the [[set]] of [[derivations]] on $S$ with values in the (bi)module $f_* M$, where $f_*:S Mod\to R Mod$ is the restriction of scalars. 

In other words,  $Der_R(S,f_*M)\cong Hom_S(\Omega^1_K(S/R),M)$. In a diagram: for every $R$-derivation $X\colon S \to M$ there is a unique morphism (of $S$-modules) $\mu\colon \Omega^1_K(S/R) \to M$ making the following diagram commute:

$$
\array{
S&\overset{X}\to     & M\\
 & \underset{d}\searr&\uparrow \mu\\
 &                   & \Omega^1_K(S/R)
}
$$

This framework also gives another construction of the module of K&#228;hler differentials, instead of the generators and relations definition given above.

Let $I$ be the [[augmentation ideal]], i.e. the kernel of the multiplication map

$$ I := Ker(m:S\otimes_R S\to S)$$

Then $\Omega^1_K_{S/R}= I/I^2$ and there is a canonical induced map $d: S\to \Omega^1_{S/R}$
given by $d s = [1\otimes s - s\otimes 1]$. 

Furthermore, if $R$ is in characteristic zero, one may introduce **K&#228;hler $p$-forms** , which are elements of the $p$-th [[exterior power]] $\Omega^p_K_{S/R}:=\Lambda_R^p \Omega^1_K_{S/R}$. The [[module]] of K&#228;hler differentials readily generalizes as a [[sheaf]] of K&#228;hler differentials for a separated morphism $f:X\to Y$ of (commutative) [[schemes]], namely it is the [[pullback]] along the embedding of the ideal sheaf of the [[diagonal subobject|diagonal subscheme]] $X\hookrightarrow X\times_Y X$.

Compare the role of [[universal differential envelope]] and [[Amitsur complex]] for  analogous constructions in the noncommutative case. The appropriate extension of the module of relative K&#228;hler differentials to the derived setting is the [[cotangent complex]] of Grothendieck--Illusie. 

## Relation to ordinary forms ##

Since there are only finite sums in the module of K&#228;hler differentials, the usual $d f=f' d t$ works only if $f$ is a finite polynomial in $t$, say, if $A$ is $C^\infty(\mathbb{R})$ ([[smooth map|smooth maps]]) or $\mathbb{R}[\![t]\!]$ ([[power series]]). For example, let $f = t^n$ then

$$\begin{aligned}
d f &= 
d(t^n)  \\
&= t^{n-1} d t  + t(d t^{n-1}) \\
&= 2 t^{n-1} d t + t^2 d(t^{n-2}) \\
&= r t^{n-1} d t + t^r d(t^{n-r}) \\
&= n t^{n-1} d t \\
&= f' d t.
\end{aligned}$$


However, we have

$$d e^t \ne e^t d t$$

as K&#228;hler differentials.  Intuitively, the reason is that $d$ cannot pass through the infinite sum

$$d e^t = d\left(\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{t^n}{n!}\right) \ne \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{d(t^n)}{n!} = e^t d t.$$

However, the only proof we know that $d e^t \ne e^t d t$ is quite tricky: in fact it uses the Axiom of Choice!

* David Speyer, K&#228;hler differentials and ordinary differentials.  ([Math Overflow](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/6074/kahler-differentials-and-ordinary-differentials/9723#9723))

It would be  desirable to either find a proof that avoids the Axiom of Choice, or show that axioms beyond ZF are necessary for this result.

To avoid this annoying property of K&#228;hler differentials we can proceed as follows.  Given a commutative algebra $A$, let $Der(A)$ be the $A$-bimodule of derivations.  Then it is not hard to check that $Der(A)$ is the dual of 

Define $\Omega^1(A)$ to be the dual of $Der(A)$:

$$ \Omega^1(A) = Der(A)^* $$

in other words, the set of $A$-module maps $\omega : Der(A) \to A$, made into an $A$-module in the usual way.   There is a derivation

$$ d : A \to \Omega^1(A) $$

given by 

$$ d f (X) = X(f)$$

for $X \in Der(A)$.

Now, suppose  $A=C^\infty(M)$ where $M$ is any smooth manifold.  Then elements of $\Omega^1(A)$ can be identified with ordinary smooth 1-forms on $M$.  This requires some work: the key is to show that every derivation of $A$ comes from a smooth vector field on $M$.   And in this case, one can show that any derivation $X: A \to M$ factors through $Omega^1(A)$ when $M$ is free, and in particular if $M=A$. 

We can expand on this remark as follows.  Quite generally, for any commutative algebra $A$ over a field $k$, we have

$$ Der(A) \cong \Omega^1_K(A)^* $$

and by definition

$$\Omega^1(A) = Der(A)^* $$

so we have

$$\Omega^1(A) \cong \Omega^1_K(A)^{**} $$

There is always a homomorphism from a module to its double dual, so we have

$$ j: \Omega^1_K(A) \to \Omega^1(A) $$

In the case when $A = C^\infty(M)$ this map is onto but typically not one-to-one, as witnessed by the fact that
$d e^t = e^t d t$ in the ordinary 1-forms $\Omega^1(A)$
but not in the K&#228;hler differentials $\Omega^1_K(A)$.  However, one can show that when $M$ is a free $A$-module, any derivation $X: A \to M$ not only factors through $\Omega^1_K(A)$ (as guaranteed by the universal property of
K&#228;hler differentials), but also $\Omega^1(A)$.

+-- {: .query}
[[Eric]]: Does this universal property mean that there is some diagram in some category for which the K&#228;hler differentials can be thought of as a (co)limit?

[[John Baez]]: Yeah, take the category all $A$ modules $M$ equipped with a derivation $X : A \to M$, and take the diagram which consists of every object in this category and every morphism, and take the colimit of that, and you'll get $\Omega^1_K(A)$.  

But this is just a cutesy way to say that $\Omega^1_K(A)$ is the [[initial object]] of this category.  

And _this_, in turn, is just a cutesy way to say that there is a derivation 

$$d : A \to \Omega^1_K(A), $$

such that if $X:A\to M$ is also a derivation, then there exists a unique $A$-module morphism 

$$\mu_X:\Omega_K^1(A)\to M$$

such that the following diagram commutes:

$$
\array{
A&\overset{X}\to     & M\\
 & \underset{d}\searr&\uparrow \mu_X\\
 &                   & \Omega_K^1{A}
}
$$

All this is general abstract nonsense, nothing special to this example!  Any universal property involving maps out of an object says that object is initial in some category --- and that, in turn, is equivalent to saying that object is the colimit of the enormous diagram consisting of all objects of the same kind!  There's a lot less here than meets the eye.

[[Eric]]: Thank you! That actually makes a little sense to me. As trivial as it may seem, the fact that I was even able to ask this question represents tremendous progress :)

=--

## References

For a proof that every derivation of $A = C^\infty(\mathbb{R})$ comes from a smooth vector field on the real line, and an extensive discussion of K&#228;hler differentials versus ordinary 1-forms, see:

* This Week's Finds in Mathematical Physics ([Week 287](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/week287.html))

See also the discussion at the $n$-Caf&#233;:

*  Blog discussion of Week 287.  ([Summary](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/12/this_weeks_finds_in_mathematic_48.html#c030626))

* [The module of K&#228;hler differentials](http://ocw.mit.edu/NR/rdonlyres/Mathematics/18-726Spring-2009/8C4F62C5-7AE2-482B-9643-890EE76499F5/0/MIT18_726s09_lec13_differentials.pdf), MIT OpenCourseWare: 18.726 Algebraic Geometry, Spring 2009.

    
[[!redirects Kahler differential]]
[[!redirects Kahler differentials]]
[[!redirects Kähler differentials]]