
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Foundations
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
#### Duality
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include duality - contents]]
=--
#### Philosophy
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include philosophy - contents]]
=--
#### Cohesive Toposes
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include cohesive infinity-toposes - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

This page collects material related to the article

* [[William Lawvere]], 

  _Cohesive Toposes and Cantor's "lauter Einsen"_, Philosophia Mathematica (3) Vol. 2 (1994), pp. 5-15. ([[LawvereCohesiveToposes.pdf:file]])

on [[adjoint cylinders]] and [[cohesive toposes]].

## Summary overview

The article claims that [[Georg Cantor]]'s original use of terminology ([Cantor 1895](#Cantor1895)) was distorted by his editor to become what we now take to be the standard meaning of [[sets]] and their [[cardinality]] in [[set theory]]. But that instead Cantor really meant "[[cohesion|cohesive types]]" when saying "Menge" and used "Kardinale" really for what we call the underlying set $\flat X$ of a cohesive type $X$.

Beyond this, the article is in part motivated from attempts to formalize thoughts appearing in [[Georg Hegel]]'s _[[Science of Logic]]_ on [[unity of opposites]].

Concretely it is about the [[unity of opposites]] that in a set all elements are "distinct, but indistinguishable". Lawvere argues that this and Cantor's original notion of _[[cardinality]]_ is captured by the [[adjoint modality]] given by [[flat modality]] $\dashv$ [[sharp modality]]. 

This seems to match well with [[Hegel]]'s _[Pure quantity](Science+of+Logic#PureQuantity)_ both informally as well as formally (as discussed there).

Notice that where the English translations of [[Hegel]]'s _[[Science of Logic]]_ say "the One", the original has "Das Eins", which might just as well be translated with "The Unit". In view of this and looking through Hegel's piece on discreteness and repulsion, it seems clear that Hegel's "Einsen" is precisely Cantor's "Einsen" as recalled by Lawvere. Namely: copies of the [[unit type]].

Notice that the German "lauter" is pretty much the English "lots of". When you say "A lot o\'" as in the slang "A lot o\' stuff" or else say "lauter" with a Bavarian accent, it comes out pretty much alike.

(? The German expression 'lauter' predominantly denotes universal quantification, so that the Cantor quote translates 'all (of) units'. There might in fact be an etymological connection to English 'lot' preserved in the meaning '(specific) quantity' - German 'Posten' like in e.g. 'yesterday arrived two lots of cd-players')

On page 7, Lawvere makes a distinction between _objective_ and _subjective_ cohesion. The subjective version involve the "coming to know" aspects of points in a space. "A good example of a type of set possessing subjective cohesion is that of recursive set, which is 'traced' by various threads generated by particular recursive functions." 

In view of the relationship between cohesion and modality, Lawvere's distinction should correspond to that between metaphysical and epistemic modalities ("As far as I know, it may be the case that...").

On page 11, Lawvere discusses categories intermediate between the original cohesive category and the base. This relates to the discussion, pp. 10-11 of [[Some Thoughts on the Future of Category Theory]], which remarks on dimensional levels of increasing determinateness, including infinitesimal increases.

## The fortunes and misfortunes of Euclid's units

It is noteworthy that Cantor's conception of cardinal number is a mildly disguised form of the definition of number as _'a multitude made up of units'_ in [[Euclid]], book VII, def.2. This was until the end of the 19th century a standard definition of the _finite_ cardinals and in Cantor's time was e.g. used by the highly influential Karl Weierstrass in his lectures[^weierstrass] and defended by Weierstrass' student Edmund Husserl in his 'Philosophie der Arithmetik' (1891).

[^weierstrass]: It seems somewhat ironical that Weierstrass whose quest for arithmetical foundations of analysis was one of the main driving forces behind 19th mathematics' move towards set-theoretic foundations actually held views on his fundamental concept 'number' that are closely related to a structural view!

This view was severely criticized by [[Gottlob Frege]] in _'Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik'_ (1884) and his reviews of Cantor and Husserl (1892,1894). Frege rejected the process of _'abstraction'_ involved in such accounts and held views on identity that made the 'distinct yet indistinguishable units' an inconsistent concept and spoke therefore sarcastically of _'ungl&#252;ckliche Einsen'_ - 'unfortunate units': the adjective has stuck in this context as we find it repeated in Zermelo's and Tait's discussion of Cantor's conception. (For more on the Frege-Cantor debate on the concept of cardinal number, which touches upon the status of structural mathematics more generally, see [Tait (1996)](#Tait96)).

## Related entries

* [[Beitr채ge zur Begr체ndung der transfiniten Mengenlehre]]

* [[cardinal number]]

* [[ETCS]]

## Links

* ncaf&#233; discussion: Rethinking Set Theory ? ([link](https://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2012/12/rethinking_set_theory.html))

* Francois Dorais : Back to Cantor ? ([link](http://logic.dorais.org/archives/1135))

## References

The text Lawvere refers to is

* {#Cantor1895} [[Georg Cantor]], _[[Beitr채ge zur Begr체ndung der transfiniten Mengenlehre]]_, Math. Ann. **46** (1895) pp.481-512. ([German original](http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/img/?PPN=GDZPPN00225557X); [online English translation](https://archive.org/details/contributionstof00cant))

The text is reprinted on pp.282-351 of Cantor's collected works and the revelant comment by Zermelo is in the second annotation on p.351: 

* [[Ernst Zermelo]] (ed.), _Georg Cantor - Gesammelte Abhandlungen Mathematischen und Philosophischen Inhalts_ , Springer Berlin 1932. ([gdz](http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/toc/?PPN=PPN237853094))

* Alan L. T. Paterson, _Frege and Hegel on concepts and number_, ms. n.d. University of Colorado Boulder. ([pdf](https://sites.google.com/site/apat1erson/nnfregh.pdf?attredirects=0))

* {#Tait96}William W. Tait, _Frege versus Cantor and Dedekind:
On the Concept of Number_ , pp.213-248 in Tait (ed.),  _Frege, Russell, Wittgenstein: Essays in Early Analytic Philosophy_ , Lasalle Open Court Press 1996. ([preprint](http://home.uchicago.edu/%7Ewwtx/frege.cantor.dedekind.pdf))

category: reference

[[!redirects Cohesive Toposes and Cantor's "lauter Einsen"]]
[[!redirects Cohesive Toposes and Cantor's "lauter Einsen"]]
[[!redirects Cohesive Toposes and Cantor's "lauter Einsen"]]
[[!redirects Cohesive Toposes and Cantor's lauter Einsen]]
[[!redirects Cohesive Toposes and Cantor's lauter Einsen]]