
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Equality and Equivalence
+--{: .hide}
[[!include equality and equivalence - contents]]
=--
#### Foundations
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

There is a lot of interesting stuff to be said about _equality_ in [[logic]], [[higher category theory]], and the [[foundations]] of mathematics, but it hasn\'t all been said here yet.

## Different kinds of equality
   {#DifferentKinds}

Here is a list of distinctions between different notions of _equality_, in different contexts, where possibly all the following pairs of notions are, in turn, "the same", just expressed in terms of different terminologies:

*  the difference between [[axiom|axiomatic]] and [[definition|defined]] equality;
*  the difference between identity and equality,
*  the difference between intensional and extensional equality,
*  the difference between equality [[judgements]] and equality [[propositions]],
*  the difference between equality and [[isomorphism]],
*  the difference between equality and [[equivalence]],
*  the possibility of operations that might not preserve equality.


## In type theory

In a formal language such as [[type theory]], one distinguishes various different notions of _equality_ or _equivalence_ of the terms of the language.

Note that both [[intensional type theory|intensional]] and [[extensional type theory|extensional]] type theories may distinguish between intensional and extensional equality (and whether the type theory satisfies [[function extensionality]] is yet a separate issue).


### Definitional equality

The most basic one is _definitional equality_ or _intensional equality_.

According to [PML (1980), p. 31](#PML):

> Definitional equality is intensional equality, or equality of meaning (synonymy). [...] It is a relation between linguistic expressions [...] Definitional equality is the equivalence relation generated by abbreviatory definitions, changes of [[bound variables]] and the [[principle of substituting equals for equals]]. [...] Definitional equality can be used to rewrite expressions [...].

on p. 60:

> ... intensional (sameness of meaning) ...

For instance the symbols "$2$" and "$s(s(0))$" (meaning the successor of the successor of $0$) are definitionally/intensionally equal terms (of type the [[natural numbers]]): the first is merely an abbreviation for the second.


### Computational equality

Another sort of equality which is very important in type theory is *computational*, *conversional*, or *reductional* equality.  This is the congruence on terms generated by various conversion or reduction rules, such as [[∞-reduction]] or [[∞-conversion]] (the choice of rules depends on the type theory).

The paradigmatic example of computational equality is a pair of terms like "$(\lambda x. x+x)2$" and "$2+2$", where the second is obtained by $\beta$-reduction from the first.  In a type theory that includes definitions by [[recursion]], expansion of a recursor is also computational equality.  For instance, if addition is defined by recursion, then "$2+2$" (that is, $s(s(0))+s(s(0))$) reduces via this rule to "$4$" (that is, $s(s(s(s(0))))$).

For better or for worse, however, it is common in type theory to use the phrase "definitional equality" to *include* computational equality, even though it involves more than mere expansion of definitional abbreviations.  There is even a phrase "$\delta$-reduction" for the substitution of definitions regarded as a conversion rule analogous to $\beta$-reduction and $\eta$-expansion.  Thus, even though "$2+2$" and "$4$" are not literally equal *by definition* but only by performing some computation (even if the computation is fairly trivial in this case), the type of equality they do enjoy is generally called *definitional*.

Perhaps this is because in type theory, computational equality plays the same role as true definitional equality.  In particular, typing judgments respect it: if $\Gamma \vdash (t:A)$, while $t$ and $A$ are computationally equal to $t'$ and $A'$, then also $\Gamma \vdash (t':A')$.  For $t$ and $t'$, this fact is sometimes called [[type preservation]] and is an important provable aspect of a type theory.  For $A$ and $A'$, the statement is generally only contentful in a [[dependent type theory]], in which case it is often included explicitly as one of the typing rules.

Another apt word for computational equality is *judgmental equality*, since it is often expressed in type theory by a separate [[judgment]]: in addition to typing judgments $\Gamma \vdash (t:A)$, we have equality judgments $\Gamma \vdash (t = t'): A$.  The rules for manipulating such judgments then include reflexivity, symmetry, transitivity, and the generating computations such as $\beta$-reduction.


### Propositional equality

By contrast with "$2+2$" and "$4$", it is pretty much impossible to write down rules of computational equality such that the symbols "$a + b$" and "$b + a$" (in a [[context]] with free variables $a$ and $b$ for, say, [[natural numbers]]) become equal.  They are (only) _extensionally_ equal, in the sense that they become computationally equal when any particular natural numbers (such as $s(s(0))$ and $s(s(s(0)))$, say) are substituted for $a$ and $b$.  An actual proof is necessary to demonstrate this equality in general: it is not a definition but a theorem that $a + b = b + a$ for all natural numbers $a, b$.  With addition defined recursively on (say) its first argument, this theorem must be proven by induction on $a$ and is surprisingly nontrivial to formalize.

In type theory, this extensional equality is a [[judgment|judgement]], not itself yet a [[proposition]] (an item in the formal system itself).  It can be internalized, however, into a notion of equality called _propositional equality_, by introducing [[identity types]] (or identity [[propositions]]).  Thus, $Id_{\mathbb{N}}(2+2,4)$ is the [[propositions as types|type/proposition]] that $2+2$ is propositionally equal to $4$, while $\prod_{a,b:\mathbb{N}} Id_{\mathbb{N}}(a+b,b+a)$ is the proposition that addition is commutative.  Exhibiting a term belonging to such a type is exhibiting (i.e. proving) such a propositonal equality.

The fact that typing judgments respect computational/judgmental equality means that if two terms $t$, $t'$ are computationally/judgmentally equal, then they are also propositionally equal.  This is because the type $Id(t,t)$ is always inhabited by the reflexivity term $refl_t$, but then this term $refl_t$ also inhabits the type $Id(t,t')$.

The converse, however, is not true in general.  It is possible to add a rule to type theory saying that "if $Id(t,t')$ is inhabited, then $t=t'$ judgmentally".  (In this case, the adjectives "computational" and "definitional" sometimes used for [[judgmental equality]] truly lose their applicability.)  This is a very strong way to make the type theory [[extensional type theory]], but is often eschewed by type theorists (even those who don't care about [[homotopy type theory]]) because it makes type checking [[decidability|undecidable]] --- because type checking has to respect [[judgmental equality]], such a rule means that it also has to respect [[propositional equality]], which in turn means that it has to be able to evaluate arbitrary functions defined inside of type theory.


## In set theory

Every [[set]] $S$ has an __equality relation__, a binary [[relation]] according to which two elements $x$ and $y$ of $S$ are related if and only if they are equal; in this case we write $x = y$.  This is the smallest [[reflexive relation]] on $S$, and it is in fact an [[equivalence relation]]; it is the only equivalence relation on $S$ that is also a [[partial order]] (although that fact is somewhat circular).  This relation is often called the __identity relation__ on $S$, either because 'identity' can mean 'equality' or because it is the [[identity]] for [[composition]] of relations. 

In the [[category]] of reflexive relations on $S$, the [[equality relation]] on $S$ is an [[initial object|initial reflexive relation]]; when the equality relation is a [[type family]] instead of a family of propositions, then the equality relation is the initial type generated by reflexivity or the [[first law of thought]].

As a [[subset]] of $S \times S$, the equality relation is often called the __[[diagonal]]__ and written $\Delta_S$ or similarly.  As an abstract set, this subset is [[isomorphism|isomorphic]] to $S$ itself, so one also sees the diagonal as a map, the [[diagonal function]] $S \overset{\Delta_S}\to S \times S$, which maps $x$ to $(x,x)$; note that $x = x$.  This is in [[Set]]; analogous [[diagonal morphisms]] exist in any [[cartesian monoidal category]].

In an [[axiomatic set theory]] such as [[ZFC]] or [[ETCS]], the presence of the equality relation is part of the axiomatization, although this is usually swept under the rug by including an equality relation by default in all first-order theories.  (It has to be made more explicit in a structural set theory such as [[SEAR]], where there is no equality relation on sets themselves, only on elements of a particular set.)

By contrast, in a [[definitional set theory]], an equality relation is *structure* which has to be put onto a [[type]] or [[preset]] in order to obtain a *set*.  See for example [[setoid]].


## Related concepts

* **equality**, [[equation]]

* [[identity type]], 

* [[identity of indiscernibles]]

* [[inequality]]

  * [[denial inequality]] 
  
  * [[apartness relation]]

* [[isomorphism]]

* [[equivalence]]

* [[weak equivalence]]

* [[homotopy equivalence]], [[weak homotopy equivalence]]

* [[equivalence in an (∞,1)-category]]

* [[equivalence of (∞,1)-categories]]

[[!include logic symbols -- table]]


## References

In 

* [[Georg Hegel]], _[[Science of Logic]]_, 1812

equality is the subject of volume 1, book 2 "Die Lehre vom Wesen" (The doctrine of essence). As discussed at _[[Science of Logic]]_, one can roughly identify in Hegel's text there the notion of intensional identity and of the reflector term in [[identity types]].

Texts on [[type theory]] typically deal with the subtleties of the notion of _equality_. For instance

* [[Per Martin-Löf]], _Intuitionistic type theory_, Lecture notes (1980)
  {#PML}

Besides 

* [[Kurt Gödel]], _Über eine bisher noch nicht benützte Erweiterung des finiten Standpunktes_. Dialectica (1958), pp. 280–287, 

which might be the first paper to mention intensional equality (and the fact that it should be decidable), there is

* [[Nicolaas de Bruijn]], _[[Automath]]_, 

where de Bruijn makes a distinction between definitional equality and "book" equality.


[[!redirects equal]]
[[!redirects equals]]
[[!redirects equality]]
[[!redirects equalities]]
[[!redirects equality predicate]]
[[!redirects equality predicates]]

[[!redirects equality relation]]
[[!redirects equality relations]]
[[!redirects identity relation]]
[[!redirects identity relations]]
[[!redirects diagonal relation]]
[[!redirects diagonal relations]]

[[!redirects definitional identity]]
[[!redirects definitional identities]]
[[!redirects definitional equality]]
[[!redirects definitional equalities]]

[[!redirects computational identity]]
[[!redirects computational identities]]
[[!redirects computational equality]]
[[!redirects computational equalities]]

[[!redirects intensional identity]]
[[!redirects intensional identities]]
[[!redirects intensional equality]]
[[!redirects intensional equalities]]
[[!redirects extensional equality]]
[[!redirects extensional equalities]]
