[[!redirects topology - global countability axioms]]

\begin{tikzcd}[column sep=normal, row sep=large]
	& 
	& 
	& \scriptsize \text{metrisable}
	& 
	& 
	\\
	& \text{second countable}
	& 
	& \sigma\text{-locally discrete base} 
	& \sigma\text{-locally finite base} 
	& \text{first countable}
	\\[.9em]
	  \text{separable}
	& 
	& \text{Lindel\"of}
	& \substack{\text{weakly Lindel\"of }\wedge \\ \sigma\text{-locally finite base}}
	& 
	& \text{Fr\'echet-Urysohn}
	\\
	& 
	& 
	& 
	& 
	& \text{sequential}
	\\
	  \text{countable chain condition}  
	& 
	& \text{weakly Lindel\"of}
	& 
	& 
	& \text{countably tight}
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=3-4, to=2-2]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=3-4, to=5-3]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=3-4, to=2-5]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=2-2, to=3-1, 
		"\substack{\text{countable}\\ \text{choice}}" description] 
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=2-2, to=3-3,
		"\substack{\text{countable}\\ \text{choice}}" description] 
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=3-1, to=3-3, "\text{if $X$ metacompact}"] 
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=3-3, to=5-3]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=3-1, to=5-3, "\text{AC}" {description, near end}]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=2-2, to=2-4]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=3-1, to=5-1]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=2-4, to=2-5]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=2-5, to=2-6]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=2-6, to=3-6]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=3-6, to=4-6]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=4-6, to=5-6]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=1-4, to=2-4]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=2-5, to=1-4, bend right, "\substack{\text{Nagata-Smirnov metrization theorem:}\\ \text{if $X$ regular and } \mathrm{T}_2}" right]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=5-1, to=3-3, "\text{AC}" {description, near end}, "\text{if $X$ paracompact}" {near start, below right}]
\end{tikzcd}


### Properties ###

* [[second-countable space|second-countable]]: there is a [[countable set|countable]] [[topological base|base]] of the topology.

* [[metrisable topological space|metrisable]]: the topology is induced by a metric.

* $\sigma$-locally discrete base: the topology of $X$ is generated by a [[countably locally discrete set of subsets|$\sigma$-locally discrete]] [[topological base|base]].

* $\sigma$-locally finite base: the topology of $X$ is generated by a [[countably locally finite set of subsets|countably locally finite]] [[topological base|base]].

* [[separable space|separable]]: there is a countable [[dense subspace|dense]] subset.

* [[Lindelöf topological space|Lindelöf]]: every [[open cover]] has a [[countable cover|countable]] sub-cover.

* [[weakly Lindelöf topological space|weakly Lindelöf]]: every [[open cover]] has a [[countable set|countable]] subcollection the union of which is dense.

* [[countable choice]]: the [[natural number|natural numbers]] are a [[projective object]] in [[Set]].

* [[metacompact space|metacompact]]: every open cover has a point-finite open refinement.


* [[countable chain condition]]: A family of pairwise disjoint open subsets is at most countable.

* [[first-countable space|first-countable]]: every point has a countable [[neighborhood base]]

* [[Frechet-Uryson space]]: the closure of a set $A$ consists precisely of all limit points of sequences in $A$

* [[sequential topological space]]: a set $A$ is closed if it contains all limit points of sequences in $A$

* [[countably tight space|countably tight]]: for each subset $A$ and each point $x\in \overline A$ there is a countable subset $D\subseteq A$ such that $x\in \overline D$.


### Implications ###

* [[open covers of metric spaces have open countably locally discrete refinements|a metric space has a $\sigma$-locally discrete base]]

* [[Nagata-Smirnov metrization theorem]]

* a second-countable space has a [[countably locally finite set of subsets|$\sigma$-locally finite]] [[topological base|base]]:  take the the collection of singeltons of all elements of a countable cover of $X$. 

* second-countable spaces are separable: use the axiom of [[countable choice]] to choose a point in each set of a countable cover.

* [[second-countable spaces are Lindelöf]].

* [[weakly Lindelöf spaces with countably locally finite base are second countable]].

* [[separable metacompact spaces are Lindelöf]].

* separable spaces satisfy the countable chain condition: given a dense set $D$ and a family $\{U_\alpha : \alpha \in A\}$, the map $D \cap \bigcup_{\alpha \in A} U_\alpha \to A$ assigning $d$ to the unique $\alpha \in A$ with $d \in U_\alpha$ is surjective.

* separable spaces are weakly Lindelöf: given a countable dense subset and an open cover [[axiom of choice|choose]] for each point of the subset an open from the cover.

* Lindelöf spaces are trivially also weakly Lindelöf.

* a space with a $\sigma$-locally finite base is first countable: obviously, every point is contained in at most countably many sets of a $\sigma$-locally finite base.

* a first-countable space is obviously Fréchet-Urysohn.

* a Fréchet-Uryson space is obviously sequential.

* a sequential space is obviously countably tight.

* [[paracompact spaces satisfying the countable chain condition are Lindelöf]].