pages/5/4/2/0/10245/content.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

There is supposed to be a $(p=3)$-[[brane]] in 6-dimensional [[supersymmetry|super]]-[[spacetime]] given by the [[Green-Schwarz action functional]] induced by the exceptional super Lie algebra $(3+2)$-cocycle on $\mathfrak{siso}(5,1)$ ([Hughes-Liu-Polchinski 86](#HughesLiuPolchinski86)).

## Related concepts

* [[D3-brane]], [[self-dual string]]

[[!include brane scan]]


## References
 {#References}

The original construction is in 

* {#HughesLiuPolchinski86} James Hughes, Jun Liu, [[Joseph Polchinski]], _Supermembranes_, Physics Letters B Volume 180, Issue 4, 20 November 1986, Pages 370&#8211;374 ([spire](http://inspirehep.net/record/20685))
 
Discussion building on that includes

* [[Martin Rocek]], [[Arkady Tseytlin]], _Partial breaking of global D=4 supersymmetry, constrained superfields, and 3-brane actions_,  	Phys.Rev.D59:106001, 1999 ([arXiv:hep-th/9811232](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9811232))

The relevant cocycle for discussion as a [[Green-Schwarz sigma-model]] is given in

* {#CastellaniDAuriaFre} [[Leonardo Castellani]], [[Riccardo D'Auria]], [[Pietro Fré]], (III.7.18) of _[[Supergravity and Superstrings - A Geometric Perspective]]_, World Scientific, 1991

  (in [[D'Auria-Fré formulation of supergravity]])


Discussion of the [[3-brane in 6d]] explicitly as a [[black brane]] in an [[M5-brane]]/[[NS5-brane]] [[worldvolume]] is due to

* {#HoweLambertWest97} [[Paul Howe]], [[Neil Lambert]], [[Peter West]], _The Threebrane Soliton of the M-Fivebrane_, Phys. Lett. B419 (1998) 79-83 ([arXiv:hep-th/9710033](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9710033))

and the understanding of this configuration as resulting from two intersecting M5-branes is due to 

* [[George Papadopoulos]], [[Paul Townsend]], _Intersecting M-branes_, Phys. Lett. B380 (1996) 273 ([arXiv:hep-th/9603087](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9603087))

* [[Arkady Tseytlin]], _Harmonic superpositions of M-branes_, Nucl. Phys. B475 (1996) 149 ([arXiv:hep-th/9604035](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9604035), <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(96)00328-8">doi:10.1016/0550-3213(96)00328-8</a>)

For more on this see

* [[Joaquim Gomis]], [[David Mateos]], [[Joan Simón]], [[Paul Townsend]], _Brane-Intersection Dynamics from Branes in Brane Backgrounds_, Phys. Lett. B430 (1998) 231-236 ([arXiv:hep-th/9803040](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9803040))


The relation to [[D=4 N=2 super Yang-Mills theory]] is discussed in

* [[Paul Howe]], [[Neil Lambert]], [[Peter West]], _Classical M-Fivebrane Dynamics and Quantum $N=2$ Yang-Mills_, Phys. Lett. B418 (1998) 85-90 ([arXiv:hep-th/9710034](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9710034))

* [[Neil Lambert]], [[Peter West]], _Gauge Fields and M-Fivebrane Dynamics_, Nucl. Phys. B524 (1998) 141-158 ([arXiv:hep-th/9712040](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9712040))

* {#LambertWest98} [[Neil Lambert]], [[Peter West]], _$N=2$ Superfields and the M-Fivebrane_, Phys. Lett. B424 (1998) 281-287 ([arXiv:hep-th/9801104](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9801104))

* [[Neil Lambert]], [[Peter West]], _Monopole Dynamics from the M-Fivebrane_, Nucl. Phys. B556 (1999) 177-196 ([arXiv:hep-th/9811025](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9811025))

and via [[F-theory]] in

* Robert de Mello Koch, Alastair Paulin-Campbell, Joao P. Rodrigues, _Monopole Dynamics in $\mathcal{N}=2$ super Yang-Mills Theory From a Threebrane Probe_, Nucl. Phys. B559 (1999) 143-164 ([arXiv:hep-th/9903207](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9903207))

Commit message:

Revision ID: 164314 Update date: 2021-05-20 16:43:53+00:00 Page name: 3-brane in 6d

pages/5/4/2/0/10245/content.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

There is supposed to be a $(p=3)$-[[brane]] in 6-dimensional [[supersymmetry|super]]-[[spacetime]] given by the [[Green-Schwarz action functional]] induced by the exceptional super Lie algebra $(3+2)$-cocycle on $\mathfrak{siso}(5,1)$ ([Hughes-Liu-Polchinski 86](#HughesLiuPolchinski86)).

Since this brane has [[codimension]] 2, it is a *[[defect brane]]*.

## Related concepts

* [[D3-brane]], [[self-dual string]]

[[!include brane scan]]


## References
 {#References}

The original construction is in 

* {#HughesLiuPolchinski86} James Hughes, Jun Liu, [[Joseph Polchinski]], _Supermembranes_, Physics Letters B Volume 180, Issue 4, 20 November 1986, Pages 370&#8211;374 ([spire](http://inspirehep.net/record/20685))
 
Discussion building on that includes

* [[Martin Rocek]], [[Arkady Tseytlin]], _Partial breaking of global D=4 supersymmetry, constrained superfields, and 3-brane actions_,  	Phys.Rev.D59:106001, 1999 ([arXiv:hep-th/9811232](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9811232))

The relevant cocycle for discussion as a [[Green-Schwarz sigma-model]] is given in

* {#CastellaniDAuriaFre} [[Leonardo Castellani]], [[Riccardo D'Auria]], [[Pietro Fré]], (III.7.18) of _[[Supergravity and Superstrings - A Geometric Perspective]]_, World Scientific, 1991

  (in [[D'Auria-Fré formulation of supergravity]])


Discussion of the [[3-brane in 6d]] explicitly as a [[black brane]] in an [[M5-brane]]/[[NS5-brane]] [[worldvolume]] is due to

* {#HoweLambertWest97} [[Paul Howe]], [[Neil Lambert]], [[Peter West]], _The Threebrane Soliton of the M-Fivebrane_, Phys. Lett. B419 (1998) 79-83 ([arXiv:hep-th/9710033](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9710033))

and the understanding of this configuration as resulting from two intersecting M5-branes is due to 

* [[George Papadopoulos]], [[Paul Townsend]], _Intersecting M-branes_, Phys. Lett. B380 (1996) 273 ([arXiv:hep-th/9603087](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9603087))

* [[Arkady Tseytlin]], _Harmonic superpositions of M-branes_, Nucl. Phys. B475 (1996) 149 ([arXiv:hep-th/9604035](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9604035), <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(96)00328-8">doi:10.1016/0550-3213(96)00328-8</a>)

For more on this see

* [[Joaquim Gomis]], [[David Mateos]], [[Joan Simón]], [[Paul Townsend]], _Brane-Intersection Dynamics from Branes in Brane Backgrounds_, Phys. Lett. B430 (1998) 231-236 ([arXiv:hep-th/9803040](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9803040))


The relation to [[D=4 N=2 super Yang-Mills theory]] is discussed in

* [[Paul Howe]], [[Neil Lambert]], [[Peter West]], _Classical M-Fivebrane Dynamics and Quantum $N=2$ Yang-Mills_, Phys. Lett. B418 (1998) 85-90 ([arXiv:hep-th/9710034](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9710034))

* [[Neil Lambert]], [[Peter West]], _Gauge Fields and M-Fivebrane Dynamics_, Nucl. Phys. B524 (1998) 141-158 ([arXiv:hep-th/9712040](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9712040))

* {#LambertWest98} [[Neil Lambert]], [[Peter West]], _$N=2$ Superfields and the M-Fivebrane_, Phys. Lett. B424 (1998) 281-287 ([arXiv:hep-th/9801104](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9801104))

* [[Neil Lambert]], [[Peter West]], _Monopole Dynamics from the M-Fivebrane_, Nucl. Phys. B556 (1999) 177-196 ([arXiv:hep-th/9811025](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9811025))

and via [[F-theory]] in

* Robert de Mello Koch, Alastair Paulin-Campbell, Joao P. Rodrigues, _Monopole Dynamics in $\mathcal{N}=2$ super Yang-Mills Theory From a Threebrane Probe_, Nucl. Phys. B559 (1999) 143-164 ([arXiv:hep-th/9903207](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9903207))
