+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea
 {#Idea}

A *generalized algebraic theory* (GAT, [Cartmell 1978](#Cartmell78)/[86](#Cartmell86)) is a [[dependent type theory]] in the syntactic sense. There are judgments for types and terms of types, and critically, in a judgment that $A$ is a type in context $\Gamma,$ the type $A$ may depend on terms of types appearing in $\Gamma.$ The only other judgments allowed are that two types or two terms are equal. 

Cartmell introduced the notion of [[contextual category]] alongside that of GAT, specifically to provide a functorial semantics. He proved that the contextual category generated by a GAT is its initial model, taking an early step in understanding the [[categorical semantics of dependent type theory]]. The latter program has dealt with complicated coherence issues that arise for decorated kinds of contextual categories, corresponding to type theories admitting constructors for $\Pi$-types, identity types, and so on. The key distinction is that a plain GAT cannot use a judgment like "$A$ is a type in context $\Gamma$" as a premise, so cannot express general type-formation rules.

The basic target for models of a GAT is the contextual category of families of (families of families of...) sets, which avoids some coherence issues by stratifying its objects by their number of layers of families. Much of the difficulty in providing categorical semantics for dependent type theory is in understanding how to transfer such models to the ordinary category of sets, other [[locally cartesian closed category|locally cartesian closed categories]] and beyond.

### Examples ###

The theory of categories is a GAT:

1. Its type judgments are that $\mathrm{Ob}$ is a type and that, in the context of two terms $a,b:\mathrm{Ob},$ we have that $\mathrm{Hom}(a,b)$ is a type.

2. Its term judgments are that $\mathrm{id}(x):\mathrm{Hom}(x,x)$ in context $x:\mathrm{Ob}$ and that $g\circ f:\mathrm{Hom}(x,z)$ in context $x,y,z:\mathrm{Ob},f:\mathrm{Hom}(x,y),g:\mathrm{Hom}(y,z).$

3. Its equations are those imposing associativity and unitality, as usual.


One can also directly axiomatize the theory of [[monoidal categories]] by
adding:

1. A term $I$ of sort $\mathrm{Ob},$ in the empty context.

2. Terms $a\otimes b:\mathrm{Ob}$ in context $a,b:\mathrm{Ob}.$

3. Similarly, terms $f\otimes g:\mathrm{Hom}(x\otimes y,z\otimes w)$ in
the appropriate context, as well as for the unitors and the associators.

4. Additional equations corresponding to the pentagon and triangle diagrams, functoriality of $\otimes$, and inverse+naturality squares for remaining operations.

The axiomatization of [[strict monoidal categories]] is similar, but briefer.

The theory of 2-categories is also a GAT, and adds types $2-\mathrm{Hom}(f,g)$ in context $x,y:\mathrm{Ob},f,g:\mathrm{Hom}(x,y).$ This and further higher-categorical examples illustrate the need for *iterated* families of sets in the models.

Finally, [[multicategories]] form a GAT with infinitely many type and term formation rules, namely that we have a type $\mathrm{Ob}$ and, for every $n,$ a type $\mathrm{Hom}(x_1,\ldots,x_n;y)$ in context $x_1,\ldots,x_n:\mathrm{Ob}.$ We must, similarly, axiomatize all the composition operations of different arities separately.

### Relationship to Many-Sorted Algebraic Theories ###

A [many-sorted algebraic theory](algebraic+theory#multisorted_algebraic_theories) is a GAT with no nontrivially dependent types.

### Relationship to Essentially Algebraic Theories ###

Cartmell's paper explains how for every GAT there is an [[essentially algebraic theory]] (EAT) with the same models and for every EAT there is a GAT with the same models in the category of sets, up to the coherence issues in moving between the categories of sets and of families of sets mentioned above. 


## Related concepts

* [[initiality conjecture]]
* [[Martin-Löf dependent type theory]]


## References

* {#Cartmell78} [[John Cartmell]], *Generalised Algebraic Theories and Contextual Categories*, PhD thesis, Oxford University (1978) &lbrack;[[Cartmell-Thesis.pdf:file]]&rbrack;

* {#Cartmell86} [[John Cartmell]], *Generalised Algebraic Theories and Contextual Categories*, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, **32** (1986) 209-243  &lbrack;[doi:10.1016/0168-0072(86)90053-9](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0168-0072%2886%2990053-9)&rbrack;

[[!redirects generalized algebraic theories]]
[[!redirects generalised algebraic theories]]
[[!redirects generalised algebraic theory]]