

> To be distinguished from _[[Weil algebra]]_.  


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

Given a [[field]] $k$, the $n$-th __Weyl algebra__ $A_{n,k}$ is an [[associative unital algebra]] over $k$ generated by the symbols $x^1,\ldots,x^n,\partial_1,\ldots,\partial_n$ modulo the "[[canonical commutation relations]]" $x^i x^j = x^j x^i$, $\partial_i\partial_j = \partial_j\partial_i$ and $\partial_i x^j - x^j \partial_i = \delta_i^j$ (the [[Kronecker delta]]). 

In [[characteristic zero]], this agrees with the algebra of [[regular differential operators]] on the $n$-dimensional [[affine space]]. 

Sometimes one considers the Weyl algebras over an arbitrary $k$-algebra $R$, including noncommutative $R$, when the definition is simply $A_{n,k}\otimes_k R$. Another generalization are the symplectic Weyl algebras. 

In [[quantum physics]], one often studies Weyl algebras over the [[complex numbers]] (see [below](#RelationToHeisenbergLieAlgebra)); the usual notation there is $p_j$ for $- \mathrm{i} \partial_j$ (where $\mathrm{i}$ is the imaginary unit).


## Properties

### Relation to Heisenberg Lie algebra
 {#RelationToHeisenbergLieAlgebra}

Consider the standard [[symplectic form]] on the [[Cartesian space]] $\mathbb{R}^{2n}$, making a [[symplectic vector space]]. This gives rise to the corresponding [[Heisenberg Lie algebra]].

Depending on conventions, the [[universal enveloping algebra]] of the [[Heisenberg Lie algebra]] either already is the [[Weyl algebra]] on $2n$ generators or else it becomes so after after forming the [[quotient algebra]] in which the central generator is identified with the [[unit element]] of the [[ground field]] -- whereas in the former case (considered eg. in [Kravchenko 2000, Def. 2.1](#Kravchenko00); [Bekaert 2005, p. 9](#Bekaert05)) the central generator plays the role of the formal [[Planck constant]] $\hbar$ with the Weyl algebra regarded as a [[formal deformation quantization]] of the [[symplectic manifold]] $\mathbb{R}^{2m}$.

Accordingly, given a [[Heisenberg Lie n-algebra|Heisenberg Lie $n$-algebra]] it makes sense to call its [[universal enveloping E-n algebra|universal enveloping $E_n$-algebra]] a _[[Weyl n-algebra|Weyl $n$-algebra]]_.



## References

* S. C. Coutinho, Introduction to: *A primer of algebraic D-modules*, London Math. Soc. Stud. Texts **33**, Cambridge University Press (1995) &lbrack;[doi:10.1017/CBO9780511623653](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511623653)&rbrack;

* [[Alan Weinstein]], p. 392 of: *Deformation quantization*, Séminaire Bourbaki volume 1993/94, exposés 775-789, Astérisque, no. 227 (1995), Talk no. 789 &lbrack;[numdam:SB_1993-1994__36__389_0](http://www.numdam.org/item/?id=SB_1993-1994__36__389_0)&rbrack;

* {#Kravchenko00} Olga Kravchenko, *Deformation Quantization of Symplectic Fibrations*, Compositio Mathematica **123** (2000) 131–165 &lbrack;[arXiv:math/9802070](https://arxiv.org/abs/math/9802070), [doi:10.1023/A:1002452002677](https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1002452002677)&rbrack;

* {#Bekaert05} [[Xavier Bekaert]], *Universal enveloping algebras and some applications in physics* (2005) &lbrack;[cds:904799](https://cds.cern.ch/record/904799), [pdf](https://cds.cern.ch/record/904799/files/cer-002575006.pdf)&rbrack;



* [[eom]]: J.-E. Bj&#246;rk, [Weyl algebra](http://eom.springer.de/w/w097670.htm)

A [[categorification]] of the Weyl algebra is introduced in operadic language in 

* Nikita Markarian, _Weyl $n$-algebras_, [arxiv/1504.01931](http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.01931)

[[!redirects Weyl algebras]]
