__Mihail Mihajlovi&#269; Postnikov__ (in standard Slavic transliteration as in G. Shevelov, Prehistory of Slavic, Columbia 1965), Rus. orig. &#1052;&#1080;&#1093;&#1072;&#1080;&#1083; &#1052;&#1080;&#1093;&#1072;&#1081;&#1083;&#1086;&#1074;&#1080;&#1095; &#1055;&#1086;&#1089;&#1090;&#1085;&#1080;&#1082;&#1086;&#1074;, sometimes spelled Mikhail Mikhailovich Postnikov, a former Russian (Soviet) topologist (27.10.1927-27.5.2004.) and a  professor at MGU until his sudden death. His thesis under the mentorship of L. S. Pontrjagin ([ru.wiki](http://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/&#1055;&#1086;&#1085;&#1090;&#1088;&#1103;&#1075;&#1080;&#1085;,_&#1051;&#1077;&#1074;_&#1057;&#1077;&#1084;&#1105;&#1085;&#1086;&#1074;&#1080;&#1095;)), contained a construction of a homotopical decomposition of a topological space into a tower of fibrations (Postnikov tower) and cohomological invariants (Postnikov invariants) which together with the tower form a "system" (nowdays called [[Postnikov system]]). The use of these data enabled him to effectively encode the full homotopy type of a space. 

After his early work, Postnikov dedicated himself to teaching, leading a famous seminar at MGU, and advising students (among most successful of his students is Rudyak) and largely neglected his own research. As a clear and superb lecturer, he also wrote several volumes of advanced textbooks in geometry and topology, and a booklet on Galois theory. Unfortunately, he also dedicated much of his efforts and time to an alternative history, considered pseudoscience by the mainstream. Some of his mathematical memoirs may be found in the book _Golden Years of Moscow Mathematics_, by Smilka Zdravkovska (AMS, 2nd ed. 2007).

See also [Postnikov at ru.wikipedia](http://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/&#1055;&#1086;&#1089;&#1090;&#1085;&#1080;&#1082;&#1086;&#1074;,_&#1052;&#1080;&#1093;&#1072;&#1080;&#1083;_&#1052;&#1080;&#1093;&#1072;&#1081;&#1083;&#1086;&#1074;&#1080;&#1095;)

Standard reference for Postnikov systems in homotopy theory is 

* George Whitehead, _Elements of homotopy theory_, chapter 9.
