
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Analysis
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include analysis - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea ##

By a *preconvergence space* we shall mean the most general notion of [[topological space]] for which the notion of [[convergence]] and of [[limit of a net|limit]] for [[filters]] and [[nets]] makes sense. Notice that the possibly more natural term "[[convergence space]]" for this notion is already taken to mean a set with [[filters]] that are isotone, centered, and directed, and that definition is not the most general definition for which the notions of convergence and limit makes sense for nets. 

## Definition ##

### In terms of filters

Given a set $S$, let $\mathcal{F}(S)$ denote the set of [[filters]] on $S$. A set $S$ is a __preconvergence space__ if it comes with a [[binary relation]] $x \to c$ between the $\mathcal{F}(S)$ and $S$ itself, for elements $x \in \mathcal{F}(S)$ and $c \in S$. 

The morphisms of preconvergence spaces are the [[pointwise continuous functions]]; a function $f$ between preconvergence spaces is __pointwise continuous__ if $F \to x$ implies that $f(F) \to f(x)$, where $f(F)$ is the filter generated by the [[filterbase]] $\{F(A) \;|\; A \in F\}$. 

### In terms of nets

A set $S$ is a **preconvergence space** if for each [[directed set]] $I$, there is a [[binary relation]] $x \to_I c$ between the set of all $I$-indexed [[nets]] in $S$ and $S$ itself, for $x \in S^I$ and $c \in S$. A preconvergence space is **[[Hausdorff]]** if each binary relation $x \to_I c$ is a [[functional relation]] for all directed sets $I$. 

The morphisms between preconvergence spaces are the **limit-preserving functions**: a function $f$ between preconvergence spaces $S$ and $T$ is **limit-preserving** if for all [[directed sets]] $I$, [[nets]] $x \in S^I$ and elements $c \in S$, $x \to_I c$ implies that $(f \circ x) \to_I f(c)$, where $f \circ x \in T^I$ is the [[net]] generated by [[composition|precomposition]] of the net $x$ by the function $f$. These functions can be called **netwise limit-preserving functions** to contrast with [[sequential limit-preserving functions]], which only preserve sequential limits in preconvergence spaces. These functions can also be called **[[continuous functions]]** or **[[pointwise continuous functions]]**, since [[net#ContinuousFunctionsDetectedByNets|nets detect the continuity of functions between them]] in [[convergence spaces]] and [[topological spaces]]. 

The [[isomorphisms]] between preconverence spaces $S$ and $T$ are the [[bijections]] $f$ from $S$ to $T$ such that for all directed sets $I$ and nets $x \in S^I$ and elements $c \in S$, $x \to_I c$ [[if and only if]] $(f \circ x) \to_I f(c)$. 

## See also ##

* [[limit of a filter]]
* [[Hausdorff space]]
* [[pointwise continuous function]]
* [[sequential preconvergence space]]
* [[convergence space]]

## References

There are a number of different concepts of a "preconvergence space" in the existing mathematical literature on convergence theory, which all differ from the given definition above. 

There is the notion of preconvergence space as a generalisation of [[convergence spaces]] and [[filter spaces]], but this notion of preconvergence space has an additional isotone condition that is also found in convergence spaces and filter spaces, but not in the given definition above: 

* Dolecki, Szymon; Mynard, Frédéric (2016). *Convergence Foundations Of Topology*. New Jersey: World Scientific Publishing Company. ISBN 978-981-4571-52-4. [OCLC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OCLC_(identifier)) [945169917](https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/945169917).

* Dolecki, Szymon (2009). Mynard, Frédéric; Pearl, Elliott (eds.). "An initiation into convergence theory". *Beyond Topology*. Contemporary Mathematics Series A.M.S. **486**: 115–162. ([pdf](http://dolecki.perso.math.cnrs.fr/init_IX07.pdf))

* Dolecki, Szymon; Mynard, Frédéric (2014). "A unified theory of function spaces and hyperspaces: local properties". *Houston J. Math*. **40** (1): 285–318. ([pdf](http://dolecki.perso.math.cnrs.fr/18dolecki.pdf))

In the literature about uniform convergence, there is also the notion of preconvergence space as a specific kind of preuniform convergence space: 

* Preuß, Gerhard. “Non-symmetric convenient topology and its relations to convenient topology.” Topology
Proceedings, Volume 29, No.2, 2005, Pages 595-611, [pdf](https://topology.nipissingu.ca/tp/reprints/v29/tp29216.pdf). 

* Fang, Jinming. “Lattice-valued preuniform convergence spaces.” Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol. 251, Sept. 2014, pp. 52–70, [doi:10.1016/j.fss.2013.11.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fss.2013.11.010). 

* Preuß, Gerhard. “Prefilter spaces and a precompletion of preuniform convergence spaces related to some well-known completions.” Topology and Its Applications, vol. 156, no. 12, July 2009, pp. 2005–2012, [doi:10.1016/j.topol.2009.03.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.topol.2009.03.026). 

[[!redirects preconvergence space]]
[[!redirects preconvergence spaces]]