A **tree** is a connected [[graph]] without cycles. Some notions of tree (such as planar tree) consider extra structure or properties as well, but the baseline notion is tree as acyclic connected graph. 

Trees are fundamental combinatorial objects which appear in a wide variety of guises. Some are given below. 

## Definitions 

* (As graphs) Recall that an [[undirected graph]] $G$ consists of a set $V$ of _vertices_ and a set $E$ of unordered pairs of vertices. A **path** in $G$ is a finite sequence of vertices $x_0, \ldots, x_n$ such that each pair $x_i x_{i+1}$ belongs to $E$. If $x_n = x_0$, then the path is called a **cycle**. A graph is **connected** if it is nonempty and if for every distinct pair of vertices $x, y$, there is a path for which $x_0 = x$ and $x_n = y$. A graph is **acyclic** if it has no cycles; an acyclic graph is also called a _forest_. A **tree** is a connected forest. 

Each forest is a [[disjoint union|disjoint sum]] (a [[coproduct]] in the category of graphs) of trees. Removal of a vertex of a tree (and any edges incident to it) results in a forest. 

Not all authors include nonemptiness as part of the notion of connectedness. See [[connected space]] for commentary on this. Forests on the other hand may be empty. 

* (As spaces) A _tree_ is a 1-dimensional [[CW-complex]] which is contractible, i.e., homotopy equivalent to a point. 

In this language, a graph is simply a 1-dimensional CW-complex; more precisely, we mean a _CW-presentation_ and not merely a space that can be so presented. A forest is then a 1-dimensional CW-complex with vanishing first [[homology group]] with integral coefficients, and a tree is a connected forest. 

For finite graphs $G$ as CW-complexes, one has the useful [[Euler characteristic|Euler formula]]: 

$$h_0 - h_1 = c_0 - c_1$$ 

where $c_i$ is the number of $i$-cells and $h_i$ is the rank of the homology group $H_i(G; \mathbb{Z})$. This gives a useful criterion for a graph to be a tree: that it be connected ($h_0 = 1$) and that the number of vertices $c_0$ be 1 greater than the number of edges $c_1$. 

* (As digraphs) A **rooted tree** is a [[directed graph]] $G$ such that the [[quiver|free category]] generated by $G$ has a [[terminal object]], called the **root** of $G$. (Thus for every vertex $x$ in $G$ there is exactly one directed path from $x$ to the root. It follows easily that the free category is a poset. There is no significant change in content if "terminal" here is replaced by "initial"; we can distinguish the conventions by a tree directed _towards_ the root rather than _away from_ the root.) 

A **rooted forest** is a coproduct of rooted trees, and again we have the fundamental fact that there is a natural [[equivalence of categories]] 

$$Tree \overset{\to}{\leftarrow} Forest$$ 

which in one direction is the functor which sends a tree to the forest which results by excising the root and all edges incident to it, and in the other sends a forest to the tree gotten by adjoining a new root and joining the roots of the forest to that new root by new edges. 

A tree in the form of an _undirected_ graph together with a chosen vertex can be regarded as a rooted tree in digraph form (with root the chosen vertex), by orienting all edges in the direction of paths going to the root. The category of rooted trees has very nice categorical properties not shared by the category of unrooted trees; see the following section. 

* (As functors) Let $\mathbb{N}$ be the [[totally ordered set]] of natural numbers $0 \leq 1 \leq 2 \leq \ldots$, viewed as a [[category]]. A **rooted forest** is a [[presheaf]] on $\mathbb{N}$, i.e., a functor 
$$F: \mathbb{N}^{op} \to Set$$ 
to "the" [[category of sets]]. A **rooted tree** is a forest for which $F(0)$ is terminal (a [[point]]). 

In this case, we get from a tree as functor $F$ to a tree as digraph by passing to the [[category of elements]] $El(F)$. The vertices of the digraph are the elements, and the edges are those morphisms of $El(F)$ which map to morphisms $i + 1 \to i$ in $\mathbb{N}^{op}$. Notice that $\mathbb{N}^{op}$ is itself (the free category on) a tree as digraph, one that is terminal in the category of forests. 

This description makes it clear that the category of forests is a (presheaf) [[topos]], indeed a [[Grothendieck topos]]; therefore the category of trees, which is equivalent, is also a topos. 

If we replace $Set$ here by the category of [[totally ordered set]]s $Tos$, then we may define a **planar forest** as a functor 

$$F: \mathbb{N}^{op} \to Tos$$ 

* (As operations) Let $\mathbf{F}$ denote the [[Lawvere theory]] freely generated by $n$-ary operations $\theta_n: x^n \to x$, one for each arity $n \geq 1$. A (finite) **planar forest** is a morphism $\phi: x^n \to x^m$ in $\mathbf{F}$; a (finite) **planar tree** is a morphism $\phi: x^n \to x$. 

The previous description is more a theorem than definition, and points up a typical way in which rooted trees are used in general recursive constructions, largely on the basis of the fundamental equivalence between forests and trees. In the case of trees as operations, the basic recursive construction is this: given a planar forest $F: x^n \to x^m$, one may form a planar tree by composing with the $m$-ary generator $\theta: x^m \to x$, and all planar trees arise in just this way. This mirrors the way in which the trees of a forest can be joined into a larger tree by joining them to a new root. 

Fancier versions of this basic recursive construction may involve "colored trees", "cherry trees", and so on, and figure prominently in the theory of [[operads]], especially in the construction of free operads. 

In fact, this type of recursivity is at the root (pun perhaps intended) of the [[cumulative hierarchy]] conception of sets in a material set theory like [[ZFC|ZFC set theory]]: all sets are collections of sets $\{x_1, \ldots, x_n\}$, and all sets are formed in this way. In order to found this conception on trees in a way that accepts the [[axiom of foundation]], one must restrict to _well-founded_ trees. A tree (pictured as a free category on a digraph, i.e., as a certain poset $P$) is **well-founded** if every object of $P^{op}$ is bounded above by a maximal element, or equivalently if there are no infinite chains $x_0 \lt x_1 \lt \ldots$ in $P^{op}$ starting from the root $x_0$. (Chains starting from the root are also called **branches**.)  See [[well-founded relation]] for other formulations of this definition (including those suitable for [[constructive mathematics]]; see [[pure set]] for details on this construction of the cumulative hierarchy, including using arbitrary trees for _ill-founded_ sets.

[To be continued...]

+-- {: .query}
Very nice! Is there a similar story worth telling for possibly infinite trees, corecursion, etc. 

_Toby_:  Well-founded trees (and pure sets) may be defined recursively; ill-founded trees (and pure sets) may be defined corecursively; there is stuff about this at [[pure set]].  (Note that even a well-founded tree may be infinite, as long as some vertex has infinitely many branches out of it.)
=--

[[!redirects trees]]