
#Contents#
* tic
{:toc}

#Idea
The __spectral theorems__ form a cornerstone of [[functional analysis]]. They are a vast generalization to infinite-dimensional [[Hilbert spaces]] of a basic result in linear algebra: an $n \times n$ Hermitian matrix can be diagonalized or conjugated to a diagonal matrix with real entries along the diagonal. 

There are several versions of the spectral theorem, or several spectral theorems, differing in the kind of operator considered (bounded or unbounded, selfadjoint or normal) and the phrasing of the statement (via spectral measures, multiplication operator norm), which is why this page does not consist of _one_ statement only. Plus there are several different strategies to prove e.g. the spectral theorem for bounded selfadjoint operators, so there is no _canonical_ way to prove it (none is particularly simple). 

# Versions of the theorem 

## memory hook
This is a short description of a way to prove the spectral theorem for bounded, selfadjoint operators in the spectral measure form, it may serve as a memory hook:

Let $\mathcal{H}$ be a Hilbert space and A be an selfadjoint operator on $\mathcal{H}$. Then we can form the smallest [[von Neumann algebra]] $\mathcal{R}$ generated by both A and $\mathbb{1}$, the identity operator. This is an abelian algebra, that is, via the [[Gelfand representation]], the abelian version of the [[Gelfand–Naimark theorem]], isometric isomorph to the algebra of continuous complex valued functions of a compact Hausdorff space. The spectral integral of A now becomes the Lebesgue (or Riemann) integral of a continuous function. 

##selfadjoint operators

* theorem: there is a one to one correspondence of (bounded or unbounded) selfadjoint operators $A$ and [[spectral measure]]s E such that 
$$
      A = \integral \lambda E(d\lambda)
$$
A is bounded iff E is bounded.

##Borel functional calculus
As stated on the [[spectral measure]] page, given a resolution of the identity $E$ one can make sense of $E(u)$ for any function $u$ that is Borel measurable. Since we have for a selfadjoint operator $A = E(u)$ for $u(\lambda) = \lambda$, one can define a bounded operator $u(A)$ for every _bounded_ Borel measurable function $u$.


### normal operators
...

[[!redirects spectral theorems]]