
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Linguistics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include linguistics - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


# Contents
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Categorical compositional distributional semantics, also known as **DisCoCat** for short, uses category theory to combine the benefits of two very different approaches to [[linguistics]]: [[categorial grammar]] and [[distributional semantics]]. 

Specifically, it uses the fact that [[pregroups]] and the category of finite-dimensional real [[vector space|vector spaces]] are both examples of [[rigid monoidal category|rigid monoidal categories]]. Semantics for [[pregroup grammars]] may then be given as a strong [[monoidal functor]], which allows sentence meanings to be computed from word meanings by linear algebra, compositionally on the grammatical structure of the sentence.

DisCoCat was first introduced in [Coecke, Sadrzadeh and Clark 2010](#Coecke10).

There is a curious (if probably shallow) analogy between DisCoCat and [[topological quantum field theory]], in that both concern strong monoidal functors from a free ([[rigid monoidal category|rigid monoidal]] or [[compact closed category|compact closed]]) category to a category of vector spaces.

## Simple example

Consider a very simple fragment of English consisting of nouns and verbs. Write $n$ for the type of nouns, and $s$ for the type of sentences. Let $\mathcal{C}$ be the free pregroup generated by $n$ and $s$. In $\mathcal{C}$, a noun will be assigned the type $n$ and a reflexive verb will be assigned the type $n^{r} s n^{l}$, since it will produce a sentence if provided with nouns on the left and right. Now given nouns such as "Alice" and "Bob" and reflexive verbs such as "loves" and "hates", the grammaticality of a sentence such as "Alice hates Bob" is witnessed by the fact that
\[ n n^{r} s n^{l} n \leq s \]
in the free pregroup.

A strong monoidal functor $F : \mathcal{C} \to FVect_{\mathbb{R}}$ is completely determined by where it sends the generators $n$ and $s$. The vector spaces $F (n)$ and $F (s)$ are called the _noun space_ and the _sentence space_, and their choice is a matter of linguistic modelling. A common approach is to pick a large set $n$ of _basis words_, say $n = 1000$ (or as many as your sparse matrix implementation can handle), and take $F (n) = \mathbb{R}^{1000}$. The choice of $F (s)$ is not well understood, but $F (s) = \mathbb{R}^{2}$ is a common choice, with the standard basis vectors interpreted as "true" and "false".

Given a grammatical parsing such as $n n^{r} s n^{l} n \leq s$, we automatically get a linear map
\[ F (n n^{r} s n^{l} n) : F (n) \otimes F (n) \otimes F (s) \otimes F (n) \otimes F (n) \to F (s) \]
given by appropriate tensor contractions.

The final ingredient we need are _word vectors_. We need to pick vectors $[\![ Alice ]\!], [\![ Bob ]\!] \in F (n)$ and $[\![ loves ]\!] \in F (n) \otimes F (s) \otimes F (n)$. The choice of these vectors is also a matter for linguistics, but a common idea is to count how often Alice (for example) appears in a corpus (for example the full text of Wikipedia) close to each of the chosen basis words.

Finally, we obtain a sentence-vector
\[ F (n n^{r} s n^{l} n \leq s) ([\![ Alice ]\!] \otimes [\![ loves ]\!] \otimes [\![ Bob ]\!]) \in F (s) \]

## Relative pronouns and Frobenius algebras

## Free pregroups vs free rigid monoidal categories

All earlier papers on DisCoCat use free pregroups for the grammar category, building on earlier work by [[Joachim Lambek]] on pregroup grammars. Unfortunately, in [Preller 2014, fact 1](#Preller14) it is proven that any strong monoidal functor from a free pregroup to $FVect$ is necessarily trivial, in the sense that it sends every generator to the monoidal unit. 
One should instead use a free [[rigid monoidal category]], a kind of [[categorification]]. Morphisms in the free autonomous category can be viewed as [[proof relevance|proof relevant]] grammatical reductions.
They may be encoded as [[string diagrams]], see [[pregroup grammar]].

This allows a slightly more elegant reformulation of our basic example. Let $\mathcal{C}$ be the free autonomous category on the objects $n, s$ and the morphisms $Alice : 1 \to n$, $Bob : 1 \to n$ and $loves : 1 \to n^{r} s n^{l}$. Then a sentence such as "Alice loves Bob", together with its grammaticality, is witnessed by a morphism $f : 1 \to s$. Now the word-vectors $[\![ Alice ]\!] = F (Alice)$, $[\![ Bob ]\!] = F (Bob)$ and $[\![ loves ]\!] = F (loves)$ become part of the data defining $F : \mathcal{C} \to FVect$, and the resulting sentence vector is simply $F (f)$.

## The Category of DisCoCat Models

One criticism of DisCoCat is that a single model is unlikely to be complex enough to capture the intricacies of a [[natural language]]. A response to this criticism is that DisCoCat models should only model a given fragment of language with some level of detail. These models can then be combined or updated to represent more complex fragments of [[natural language]]. Indeed, in _[Translating and Evolving: Towards a Model of Language Change in DisCoCat](https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.11041)_ the authors construct a category $DisCoCat$ of DisCoCat models where

* objects are [[strong monoidal functors]]
$$ F \colon (J,*) \to (FVect,\otimes) $$
where $(J,*)$ is a category which is freely monoidal on some set of grammatical types. In practice $J$ might be freely equipped with an [[rigid monoidal category|rigid]] structure or a [[Frobenius algebra]] on each object.

* A morphism from a language model $F \colon J \to FVect$ to a language model $F' \colon J' \to FVect$ is a tuple $(j , \alpha)$ where $j$ is a [[monoidal functor]] $i \colon J \to J'$ and $\alpha \colon F \Rightarrow F' \circ j$ is a [[monoidal natural transformation]] filling the following triangle
\begin{centre}
  \begin{xymatrix}
   J\ar[r]^F \ar[d]_j& FVect \\
   J' \ar[ur]^{F'}\ & 
   \end{xymatrix}
\end{centre}
Morphisms in $DisCoCat$ are called translations because they represent ways of changing your semantic interpretations of grammatical types in a way which is coherent with a change in grammar. 

### The Product Space Representation

In [_Mathematical foundations for a compositional distributional model of meaning_](https://arxiv.org/abs/1003.4394) a different description of a DisCoCat model was described. Let $J$ be a free [[autonomous category]] representing grammar and assume that you have an assignment $V_a$ of each grammatical type $a$ to a finite dimensional vector space. Then grammatical computations of meaning can be performed in the [[product category]] $J \times FVect$. Let $a_1 \cdot \ldots \cdot a_n$ be an object in $J$ and let $v \in V_{a_1} \otimes \ldots \otimes V_{a_n}$ be its semantic meaning. Then a grammatical reduction $f \colon a \to b$ built from the units and counits in $J$ can be paired with the corresponding structure maps in $FVect$. This pairing allows you to apply the structure maps corresponding to $f$ to the vector $v$ to get a new semantic meaning. In essence, this approach identifies an autonomous subcategory of $J \times FVect$ where meaning computations can occur.

This product space representation can be related to monoidal functor perspective via the [[category of elements]]. Using the forgetful functor $i \colon FVect \to Set$ the product space of a language model $F \colon J \to FVect$ can be defined as the category of elements $\int i \circ F$. The product space representation is useful for equipping a language model with a specific set of words. If $W$ is a set of words then a map $W \to \int i \circ F$ describes an assignment of each word to a grammatical type and semantic meaning.

## Variations

DisCoCat is relatively easy to modify by replacing the semantic category $FVect$ with some other category with the appropriate structure. Examples include

* [[relation|Relations]], which yields a semantics in [[regular logic]], closely related to [[cartesian bicategory|Cartesian bicategories]], see [Felice, Meichanetzidis and Toumi 2019](#Felice19)

* [[density matrix|Density matrices]] to model semantic ambiguity such as "financial bank" vs "river bank"

* Convex relations (i.e. [[relation|relations]] in the category of [[convex space|convex spaces]]) to model cognition ([Bolt et al 2016](#Bolt16))

* [[game theory|Games]] to model dialogue and Wittgenstein's [[language game|language games]] ([Hedges and Lewis 2018](#Hedges18))

## Related entries

* [[DisCoPy]]

# References

* [Linguistics using category theory](https://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2018/02/linguistics_using_category_the.html) on the n-category café

* [Cognition, convexity and category theory](https://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2018/03/cognition_convexity_and_catego.html) on the n-category café

* [Meeting the Dialogue Challenge](https://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2019/06/meeting_the_dialogue_challenge.html) on the n-category café

* {#Coecke10} [[Bob Coecke]], [[Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh]] and Stephen Clark, _Mathematical foundations for a compositional distributional model of meaning_. Lambek Festschrift, special issue of Linguistic Analysis, 2010. ([arXiv:1003.4394](https://arxiv.org/abs/1003.4394))

* {#Preller14} Anne Preller, _From logical to distributional methods_. QPL 2013. ([arXiv:1412.8527](https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.8527))

* {#Bolt16} Josef Bolt, [[Bob Coecke]], Fabrizio Genovese, Martha Lewis, Daniel Marsden and Robin Piedeleu, _Interacting conceptual spaces I: Grammatical composition of concepts_, SLPCS 2016 ([arXiv:1703.08314](https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.08314)

* {#Felice19} Giovanni de Felice, Konstantinos Meichanetzidis and [[Alexis Toumi]], _Functorial Question Answering_, ACT 2019. ([arXiv:1905.07408](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.07408)])

* {#Hedges18} [[Jules Hedges]] and Martha Lewis, _Towards functorial language-games_, CAPNS 2018. ([arXiv:1807.07828](https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.07828))

The category $DisCoCat$ and it's relationship to the product space representation is discussed in:

* [[Tai-Danae Bradley]], Martha Lewis, [[Jade Master]], and Brad Theilman 
_Translating and Evolving: Towards a Model of Language Change in DisCoCat_ [arXiv:1811.11041](https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.11041)

[[!redirects DisCoCat]]

