pages/1/8/5/2/22581/content.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[representation theory]] of the [[general linear groups]].

## Properties

### Polynomial irreps

The polynomial [[irreps]] of $GL(n,\mathbb{C})$ are labeled by [[Young diagrams]] (e.g. [Fulton 97, Thm. 2 on p. 114](#Fulton97)). These are equivalently the irreps of the [[special linear group]] (e.g. [Sternberg 94, Sec. 5.8](#Sternberg94)).

### Dimension of irreps and hook-content formula

[[!include hook length and content formulas -- table]]


## Related concepts

* [[Schur-Weyl duality]]

* [[representation theory of the symmetric group]]

* [[representation theory of the special unitary group]]


## References

* {#Sternberg94} [[Shlomo Sternberg]], Section 5 and Appendix C.7 of: *Group Theory and Physics*, Cambridge University Press 1994

* {#Fulton97} [[William Fulton]], Section 8 of: _Young Tableaux, with Applications to Representation Theory and Geometry_, Cambridge U. Press, 1997 ([doi:10.1017/CBO9780511626241](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511626241))



* Amritanshu Prasad, *Representations of General Linear Groups* ([doi:10.1017/CBO9781139976824.007]( https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139976824.007))


[[!redirects representation theory of general linear groups]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 164104 Update date: 2021-05-17 08:21:09+00:00 Page name: representation theory of the general linear group

pages/1/8/5/2/22581/content.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[representation theory]] of the [[general linear groups]].

## Properties

### Polynomial irreps

The polynomial [[irreps]] of $GL(n,\mathbb{C})$ are labeled by [[Young diagrams]] $\lambda \in Part(n)$ (e.g. [Fulton 97, Thm. 2 on p. 114](#Fulton97)). 

These are equivalently the irreps of the [[special linear group]] (e.g. [Sternberg 94, Sec. 5.8](#Sternberg94)).

And for $rows(\lambda) \leq n-1$ these are also the irreps of the [[special unitary group]] (e.g. [Peluse 14, p. 2](representation+theory+of+the+special+unitary+group#Peluse14)).

### Dimension of irreps and hook-content formula

[[!include hook length and content formulas -- table]]


## Related concepts

* [[Schur-Weyl duality]]

* [[representation theory of the symmetric group]]

* [[representation theory of the special unitary group]]


## References

* {#Sternberg94} [[Shlomo Sternberg]], Section 5 and Appendix C.7 of: *Group Theory and Physics*, Cambridge University Press 1994

* {#Fulton97} [[William Fulton]], Section 8 of: _Young Tableaux, with Applications to Representation Theory and Geometry_, Cambridge U. Press, 1997 ([doi:10.1017/CBO9780511626241](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511626241))



* Amritanshu Prasad, *Representations of General Linear Groups* ([doi:10.1017/CBO9781139976824.007](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139976824.007)), Chapter 6 in: *Representation theory -- A Combinatorial Viewpoint*, Cambridge University Press  2014 ([doi:10.1017/CBO9781139976824](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139976824))


[[!redirects representation theory of general linear groups]]
