pages/8/9/4/2/22498/content.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[representation theory]] of the [[symmetric groups]].

## References

Textbook accounts:

* [[G. D. James]], *The Representation Theory of the Symmetric Groups*,  Lecture Notes in Mathematics, volume 682, Springer 1978 ([doi:10.1007/BFb0067708](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/BFb0067708), [pdf](http://www-users.math.umn.edu/~webb/oldteaching/Year2010-11/the-representation-theory-of-the-symmetric-groups-SLN.pdf))

* {#Diaconis88} [[Persi Diaconis]], Chapter 7 of: *Group Representations  in Probability  and  Statistics*, IMS Lecture Notes Monogr. Ser., 11: 198pp. (1988) ([jstor:i397389](https://www.jstor.org/stable/i397389), [ISBN: 0940600145](https://projecteuclid.org/ebooks/institute-of-mathematical-statistics-lecture-notes-monograph-series/Group-representations-in-probability-and-statistics/toc/10.1214/lnms/1215467407), [pdf](https://jdc.math.uwo.ca/M9140a-2012-summer/Diaconis.pdf))

* {#Sagan01} [[Bruce Sagan]], _The symmetric group_, Springer 2001 ([doi:10.1007/978-1-4757-6804-6](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-1-4757-6804-6), [pdf](http://math.sfsu.edu/federico/Clase/RepTh/sagan.pdf))


See also:

* Wikipedia, *[Representation theory of the symmetric group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representation_theory_of_the_symmetric_group)*


[[!redirects representation theory of the symmetric groups]]
[[!redirects representation theory of symmetric groups]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 163125 Update date: 2021-04-29 06:39:21+00:00 Page name: representation theory of the symmetric group

pages/8/9/4/2/22498/content.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[representation theory]] of the [[symmetric groups]].

## Properties

### Irreducible representations
 {#IrreducibleRepresentations}

In [[characteristic zero]], the [[irreducible representations]] of the symmetric group are, up to [[isomorphism]], given by the [[Specht modules]] labled by [[partitions]] of $n$ (e.g. [Sagan 01, Thm. 2.4.6](#Sagan01)).

## Related concepts

* [[Specht module]]

## References

Textbook accounts:

* [[G. D. James]], *The Representation Theory of the Symmetric Groups*,  Lecture Notes in Mathematics, volume 682, Springer 1978 ([doi:10.1007/BFb0067708](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/BFb0067708), [pdf](http://www-users.math.umn.edu/~webb/oldteaching/Year2010-11/the-representation-theory-of-the-symmetric-groups-SLN.pdf))

* {#Diaconis88} [[Persi Diaconis]], Chapter 7 of: *Group Representations  in Probability  and  Statistics*, IMS Lecture Notes Monogr. Ser., 11: 198pp. (1988) ([jstor:i397389](https://www.jstor.org/stable/i397389), [ISBN: 0940600145](https://projecteuclid.org/ebooks/institute-of-mathematical-statistics-lecture-notes-monograph-series/Group-representations-in-probability-and-statistics/toc/10.1214/lnms/1215467407), [pdf](https://jdc.math.uwo.ca/M9140a-2012-summer/Diaconis.pdf))

* {#Sagan01} [[Bruce Sagan]], _The symmetric group_, Springer 2001 ([doi:10.1007/978-1-4757-6804-6](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-1-4757-6804-6), [pdf](http://math.sfsu.edu/federico/Clase/RepTh/sagan.pdf))


See also:

* Wikipedia, *[Representation theory of the symmetric group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representation_theory_of_the_symmetric_group)*


[[!redirects representation theory of the symmetric groups]]
[[!redirects representation theory of symmetric groups]]
