pages/5/0/5/1/21505/content.md, before:



## Selected writings

On [[universal principal bundle|universal]] [[equivariant principal bundles]]:

* [[Mitutaka Murayama]], [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], _Universal equivariant bundles_, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 123 (1995), 1289-1295 ([doi:10.1090/S0002-9939-1995-1231040-9](https://doi.org/10.1090/S0002-9939-1995-1231040-9))


On the [[adjunction between topological spaces and diffeological spaces]]:

* {#SYH10} [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], K. Yoshida, [[Tadayuki Haraguchi]], _Homology and cohomology via enriched bifunctors_, Kyushu Journal of Mathematics, 2018 Volume 72 Issue 2 Pages 239-252 ([arXiv:1010.3336](https://arxiv.org/abs/1010.3336), [doi:10.2206/kyushujm.72.239]( https://doi.org/10.2206/kyushujm.72.239))

On a [[model structure on diffeological spaces]]:

* [[Tadayuki Haraguchi]], [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], _A model structure on the category of diffeological spaces_ ([arXiv:1311.5668](https://arxiv.org/abs/1311.5668))

* [[Tadayuki Haraguchi]], [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], _On homotopy types of diffeological cell complexes_ ([arXiv:1912.05359](https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.05359))

* {#HaraguchiShimakawa20} [[Tadayuki Haraguchi]], [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], _A model structure on the category of diffeological spaces, I_ ([arXiv:2011.12842](https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.12842))

Commit message:

Revision ID: 165342 Update date: 2021-06-12 10:00:35+00:00 Page name: Kazuhisa Shimakawa

pages/5/0/5/1/21505/content.md, after:



## Selected writings

On [[equivariant algebraic K-theory]]:

* [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], _Note on the equivariant $K$-theory spectrum_, Publ. RIMS, Kyoto Univ. **29** (1993), 449-453 ([pdf](http://www.ems-ph.org/journals/show_pdf.php?issn=0034-5318&vol=29&iss=3&rank=5), [doi:10.2977/prims/1195167052](https://doi.org/10.2977/prims/1195167052))


On [[universal principal bundle|universal]] [[equivariant principal bundles]]:

* [[Mitutaka Murayama]], [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], _Universal equivariant bundles_, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 123 (1995), 1289-1295 ([doi:10.1090/S0002-9939-1995-1231040-9](https://doi.org/10.1090/S0002-9939-1995-1231040-9))


On the [[adjunction between topological spaces and diffeological spaces]]:

* {#SYH10} [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], K. Yoshida, [[Tadayuki Haraguchi]], _Homology and cohomology via enriched bifunctors_, Kyushu Journal of Mathematics, 2018 Volume 72 Issue 2 Pages 239-252 ([arXiv:1010.3336](https://arxiv.org/abs/1010.3336), [doi:10.2206/kyushujm.72.239]( https://doi.org/10.2206/kyushujm.72.239))

On a [[model structure on diffeological spaces]]:

* [[Tadayuki Haraguchi]], [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], _A model structure on the category of diffeological spaces_ ([arXiv:1311.5668](https://arxiv.org/abs/1311.5668))

* [[Tadayuki Haraguchi]], [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], _On homotopy types of diffeological cell complexes_ ([arXiv:1912.05359](https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.05359))

* {#HaraguchiShimakawa20} [[Tadayuki Haraguchi]], [[Kazuhisa Shimakawa]], _A model structure on the category of diffeological spaces, I_ ([arXiv:2011.12842](https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.12842))
