# Extensive categories #
* tic
{: toc}


##Idea##

A [[category]] is _extensive_ if it has [[coproducts]] that interact well with [[pullbacks]].  Variations include _lextensive_, _disjunctive_, and _positive_ categories.  All of these come in _finitary_ and _infinitary_ versions.


##Definitions##

An __finitely extensive category__ (which is the usual meaning of __extensive category__) is a category $E$ with finite [[coproduct|coproducts]] such that one, hence all, of the following equivalent conditions holds:

 1. Finite coproducts are [[disjoint coproduct|disjoint]] and [[pullback stability|stable under pullback]].
 1. For any objects $a,b$ the coproduct functor $E/a \times E/b \to E/(a+b)$ is an [[equivalence of categories]].
 1. In any commutative diagram
 $$\array{x & \to & z & \leftarrow & y\\
   \downarrow  & &   \downarrow  &  &  \downarrow \\
   a & \to & a+b & \leftarrow & b}$$
 the two squares are pullbacks if and only if the top row is a coproduct diagram.

An __infinitary extensive category__ is a category $E$ with all (small) [[coproduct]]s such that coproducts are disjoint and stable under pullback.

Extensive categories are also called __positive categories__, especially if they are also [[coherent category|coherent]].  Note that any disjoint coproduct in a coherent category is automatically pullback-stable.  A positive coherent category which is also [[exact category|exact]] is called a [[pretopos]].  Infinitary pretoposes encapsulate all the exactness conditions of Giraud's theorem characterizing [[Grothendieck topos|Grothendieck toposes]].

If an extensive category also has [[finitely complete category|finite limits]], it is called __lextensive__ or __disjunctive__.  (Note that the default meaning of 'disjunctive', unlike the other terms, is the infinitary case.)


##Remarks##

* The alternative definitions of finitary disjunctive refer only to binary coproducts, but they obviously imply analogous statements for $n$-ary coproducts for all finite $n \ge 1$.  Less obviously, they also imply the analogous statement for $0$-ary coproducts (that is, [[initial object]]s).  In this case, the statement is that the initial object 0 is _strict_ (any map $a\to 0$ is an isomorphism).

* See [[familial regularity and exactness]] for a generalization of extensivity and its relationship to [[exact category|exactness]].


##Examples##

1. A [[topos]] is finitary lextensive; a [[Grothendieck topos]] is infinitary lextensive.

1. The category [[Top]] of topological spaces is infinitary lextensive.

1. The category of affine schemes (opposite to the category of commutative [[ring]]s with identity) is infinitary lextensive.

1. The category [[Cat]] is infinitary lextensive.


##Superextensive sites##

Any extensive category admits a [[Grothendieck topology]] whose [[cover|covering families]] are (generated by) the families of inclusions into a coproduct (finite or small, as appropriate).  We call this the **extensive coverage**.  In general, we call a [[site]] __superextensive__ if its underlying category is extensive, its covering families are generated by (finite or small) families, and its coverage includes the extensive one. (Here, the prefix 'super-' is opposite to 'sub-' as in '[[subset]]'.) In this case, one can replace any (finite or small) covering family $(j_i: U_i \to B)_i$ with the single map $[j_i]_i: \coprod_i U_i \to B$.  The original coverage is then generated by these single maps together with the extensive coverage.

Well known examples of infinitary superextensive sites include [[Top]] and [[Diff]] with their usual topologies, generated by the open covers.


##References##

Carboni, Aurelio and Lack, Stephen and Walters, R. F. C., _Introduction to extensive and distributive categories_, JPAA 84 no. 2 


## Discussions ##

While creating this page, we had the following discussion regarding "finitely" versus "infinitary."

+--{.query}
Can we say 'small-extensive'? Or even redefine 'extensive' to have this meaning, using 'finitely extensive' for the first version? &#8212;Toby

I think "extensive" is pretty well established for the finite version, and I would be reluctant to try to change it.  I wouldn't object too much to "small-extensive" for the infinitary version in principle, but $\infty$-positive is used in the Elephant and possibly elsewhere.  I think the topos theorists think by analogy with $\infty$-pretopos, which I don't think we have much hope of changing, despite the unfortunate clash with "$\infty$-topos."  But you can use "finitary disjunctive" and "disjunctive" in the lex case, which most examples are. -Mike

_Mike_: Okay, I just ran across one paper that uses "(infinitary) extensive" for the infinitary version the first time it was introduced, and then dropped the parenthetical for the rest of the paper.  I also recall seeing "extensive fibration" used for a fibration having disjoint and stable indexed coproducts, which is certainly a (potentially) infinitary notion.  So perhaps there is no real consensus on whether "extensive" definitely implies the finite version or the infinitary one.

_Toby_: It would be nice to not overload the prefix '$\infty$-' so much. It\'s like 'continuous'; default to small.

_Mike_: I agree that it would be nice to avoid $\infty$-.  What if we do what we did for [[omega-category]]?  That is, if you want to be unambiguous, say either "finitary extensive" or "infinitary extensive," and in any particular context you are allowed to define "extensive" at the beginning to be one of the two and use it without prefix in what follows.

_Toby_: Sure. Of course, the general concept is $\kappa$-extensive, where $\kappa$ is any cardinal (which we may assume to be regular).

=--

We also had the following discussion regarding the terminology "extensive coverage" and "superextensive site."

+--{.query}

I don't believe this, for reasons having nothing to do with the unlikelihood that a non-posetal small site would have all small coproducts (-: .  For example, any extensive category has an _extensive coverage_ in which the covering families are the families of coprojections into a finite coproduct.  But the only singleton covers are isomorphisms, which certainly do not form a basis. -Mike

Do you believe it now? &#8212;Toby

_Now_ I believe it.  (An extensive category with the trivial coverage would have been a counterexample to your second version.) -Mike

Great, I got you to figure it out for me! Now you can tell me if you like my terminology. &#8212;Toby

Hmm, I'm not sure.  This sort of thing does seem to crop up a lot and  it might be nice to have a name for it.  On the other hand, "extensive site" could potentially be misinterpreted as meaning either "any site whose underlying category is extensive," or "an extensive category equipped with its extensive coverage," instead of what you want, which is "an extensive category equipped with a coverage that _includes_ its extensive coverage." -Mike

_Toby_: I\'m of the school that believes that when you pile on adjectives, they are allowed to interact to produce additional requirements of compatibility. (Take 'closed monoidal category' for a pretty extreme example.) One can say 'trivial extensive site' for an extensive category equipped with the coverage of coproduct inclusions.

It\'s hard to use Google to determine if 'extensive site' already has a meaning.

_Mike_: I would argue that in "closed monoidal category" the adjective "closed" modifies "monoidal category" rather than simply "category."  However, I don't dispute the general principle.  I think there is more potential for confusion with "extensive site" than there is with "closed monoidal category," however, but as I said I'm ambivalent at the moment.

_Toby_: And similarly, 'extensive' modifies 'site', not 'category' (which doesn\'t actually appear, so this practice can only be more justified). (^_^)

_Mike_: I am now firmly convinced that we should _not_ use "extensive site" for this, because it seems to be an otherwise universal convention that the same adjective is applied to the coverage and the site.  For example, in A2.1.11(b) the Elephant uses "coherent site" for "coherent category equipped with its coherent coverage," without even formally defining "coherent site" (only "coherent coverage").  And I believe algebraic geometers speak of "the Zariski site" or "the etale site" meaning some appropriate category equipped with the Zariski coverage or the etale coverage.  So I believe "extensive site" should really mean "an extensive category equipped with its extensive coverage."

_Toby_: And here I was thinking that I should complain about this very language! I don\'t know about coherent sites, but certainly there are plenty of extensive sites (in the general sense) that aren\'t extensive sites (in the restricted sense), including what is arguably the original large site ($\Top$). If you *want* the restricted sense, then you only have to add an adjective ('trivial'), but what do you do if you want the general sense?

But perhaps you have an answer for that?

_Mike_: You can certainly complain about it, but I think it one of those numerous examples of well-established terminology that is suboptimal, but not bad enough to be worth trying to change.  Changing any piece of terminology is hard enough, and insisting that everyone change the words they are using for familiar concepts is part of what originally gave category theory a bad name in the U.S., and has resulted in at least one unreadable book which might otherwise have been quite good.  Also, as Jaap van Oosten pointed out in the introduction to his book "Realizability," the only thing worse than bad terminology is continually changing terminology.  I'm glad that "triple" was changed to "monad," because "triple" was truly a horrible term, but the fact that it was changed still makes it more difficult to read old papers.  So I think we need to pick and choose our terminological battles very carefully.

One can, of course, always say "a site whose underlying category is extensive."  By analogy with "subcanonical coverage" (= contained in the canonical coverage) one might also say "superextensive coverage."  And despite how common such sites may be, it's not immediately clear to me how important it is to identify them.

_Toby_: They\'re important for a paper that I\'m working on with John, if only to link to previous work. But 'superextensive site' will do.

_Mike_: Okay, I changed the text.  If we're agreed on that terminology, we could probably remove this discussion.  Or maybe we should collect all our past terminological arguments on one page, so that people who are interested can see what we went through?

_Toby_: Should we create a page [[terminological disputes]] (for archiving only, with a note of the relevant original page if anyone wants to reopen discussion) or use (or ask for) a Caf&#233; post. The former is more convenient, the latter arguably more proper.

=--


[[!redirects lextensive category]]
