A **finite set** is a set $A$ for which there exists a [[bijection]] between $A$ and the set $\{k\in N | k\lt n\}$ for some $n\in N$, where $N$ is the natural numbers.

Classically, the finite sets are the [[finitely presentable object|finitely presentable objects]] in [[Set]].

The category [[FinSet]] of finite sets and functions between them is essentially the subject matter of [[combinatorics]]; it\'s fundamental in the subject of [[structure type]]s.

# Finiteness constructively and internally

In [[constructivism|constructive mathematics]], and internally to a [[topos]], a number of classically equivalent notions of finiteness become distinguishable.  In addition to the above notion (for which one generally reserves "finite"), we have the following.

* A set is **subfinite** if it admits an injection into some finite set.

* A set is **finitely indexed** (also called **Kuratowski-finite**, **K-finite**, or even sometimes, confusingly, _subfinite_) if it is a surjective image of some finite set.

* A set is **subfinitely indexed** (also called **$\tilde{K}$-finite**) if it admits a surjection from a subfinite set, or equivalently admits an injection to a finitely indexed set; that is, it is a [[subquotient]] of a finite set.

* A set is **Dedekind-finite** if any injection from it to itself must be a bijection.  In contrast to the previous three notions, Dedekind-finite infinite sets can coexist with [[excluded middle|PEM]], although [[countable choice]] suffices to banish them.

In constructive mathematics, one is usually interested in the finite sets, although the finitely indexed sets are also sometimes useful. Note that a finitely indexed set with [[decidable object|decidable equality]] must actually be finite.

Finite sets are always [[projective object|projective]]; that is, the "finite [[axiom of choice]]" always holds.  However, if any finite set greater than 1 is [[choice object|choice]], or if every 2-indexed set is projective, then the logic must be classical (see [[excluded middle]] for a proof).

## Finiteness without infinity

The above definition of "finite," and hence all the above definitions except for Dedekind-finiteness, only make sense given the set of natural numbers, i.e., given an axiom of infinity.  However, they can  all be rephrased to make sense even without an axiom of infinity (and thus in a topos without a [[natural numbers object]]).  Basically, you define (for a given set $S$) the concept of 'collection of subsets of $S$ that includes all of the finite subsets' by requiring it to be closed under inductive operations appropriate for the sense of 'finite' that you want; then $S$ is finite if and only if it is an element of all such collections.  Namely, for any set $S$ we define the following subsets of $P(S)$.

* $K(S)$ is the smallest subset of $P(S)$ containing the empty set and closed under the operation $A \mapsto A \cup B$ for $A$ a subset of $S$ and $B$ a singleton in $S$.  Then $S$ is finitely-indexed iff $S\in K(S)$.  Note that $K(S)$ is also the free [[semilattice]] generated by $S$.
* $\tilde{K}(S)$ is the smallest subset of $P(S)$ containing the empty set and closed under the operation $A \mapsto A \cup B$ for $A$ a subset of $S$ and $B$ a subsingleton in $S$.  Then $S$ is subfinitely-indexed iff $S\in \tilde{K}(S)$.
* $F(S)$ is the smallest subset of $P(S)$ containing the empty set and closed under the operation $A \mapsto A \cup B$ for $A$ a subset of $S$ and $B$ a singleton in $S$ disjoint from $A$.  Then $S$ is finite iff $S\in F(S)$.
* $\tilde{F}(S)$ is the smallest subset of $P(S)$ containing the empty set and closed under the operation $A \mapsto A \cup B$ for $A$ a subset of $S$ and $B$ a subsingleton in $S$ disjoint from $A$.  Then $S$ is subfinite iff $S\in \tilde{F}(S)$.

## Challenge: Finiteness predicatively without infinity

_Toby_: Can you think of a way to define these notions of finite without a set of truth values and without a natural numbers object? Equivalently, can you define them in an arbitrary [[locally cartesian closed category|locally cartesian closed]] [[pretopos]]?  (Use the axiom of [[subobject collection]] if necessary.)

## Finite objects in a topos

In a topos, there are both "external" and "internal" versions of all the above notions of finiteness, depending on whether we interpret their meaning "globally" or in the [[internal logic]] of the topos.

The _external_ version of a "finite set" is usually called a **finite cardinal**.  This is an object $[n]$ which is the pullback of $N_{\lt}\to N$ along some [[global element]] $n:1\to N$.  Here $N$ is a [[natural numbers object]] and $N_{\lt} \hookrightarrow N\times N$ is its strict order relation.  We can then consider [[subobject]]s, [[quotient]]s, and [[subquotient]]s of finite cardinals to obtain external versions of subfinite, finitely indexed, and subfinitely indexed sets.

The full subcategory of finite cardinals in any topos is again a topos, and it is [[Boolean topos|Boolean]].  Its [[subobject classifier]] is $2=1\sqcup 1$, which in the ambient topos is the classifier only of [[decidable object|decidable]] subobjects.  This means that classically valid arguments, including all of finitary combinatorics, can generally be applied easily to finite cardinals, as long as we always interpret "subset" to mean "decidable subset."

The _internal_ version of a "finite set" is an object $X$ such that "$X$ is a finite cardinal" is true in the internal logic.  This is equivalent to saying that $X$ is _locally_ isomorphic to a finite cardinal, i.e. there is an epimorphism $U\to 1$ and a [[generalized element]] $n:U\to N$ such that $U\times X \cong n^*(N_\lt)$ over $U$.  Equivalently, there is a $U\to 1$ such that $U\times X$ is a finite cardinal in the slice topos $S/U$.

Likewise, the internal version of "finitely indexed set" is one which is locally a quotient of a finite cardinal, and so on.  An "internally finitely indexed" object is generally called a _$K$-finite object_, and an "internally subfinitely indexed" one is called a _$\tilde{K}$-finite object_.  Since it is still provable in the internal logic that any decidable finitely indexed set is finite, the "internally finite" objects can be characterized as the _decidable $K$-finite objects_.  There does not appear to be an accepted term for "internally subfinite" objects.

The decidable $K$-finite objects in any topos also form a Boolean topos whose subobject classifier is $2$; it can be regarded as the "[[stack]] completion" of the topos of finite cardinals.  The category of $K$-finite objects is a topos if and only if every $K$-finite object is decidable, and the category of $\tilde{K}$-finite objects is a topos if (but not only if) the subobject classifier is $K$-finite.

## Examples

* In any Boolean topos, all four internal notions coincide.  In a [[well-pointed topos]], each internal notion coincides with its external notion.  Therefore, in a well-pointed Boolean topos, including the topos [[Set]] as usually conceived, all notions of finiteness coincide.

* In a [[presheaf]] topos $[C^{op},Set]$, the finite cardinals are the finite-set-valued functors which are constant on each connected component.  In particular, if $C$ is a [[group]], then the topos of finite cardinals is equivalent to $FinSet$.

* Likewise, in the topos $Sh(X)$ of [[sheaf|sheaves]] on a space $X$, the finite cardinals are the locally constant functions $X\to N$.  So if $X$ is connected, the topos of finite cardinals in $Sh(X)$ is also equivalent to $FinSet$.

* By contrast, the $K$-finite objects in $[C^{op},Set]$ are the finite-set-valued functors each of whose transition functions is surjective, and the _decidable_ K-finite objects are the finite-set-valued functors each of whose transition functions is bijective.

* In particular, if $C$ is a groupoid, the topos of decidable $K$-finite objects is equivalent to $[C^{op},FinSet]$.  Since the topos of presheaves on a groupoid is Boolean, this gives an example of a Boolean topos in which the finite cardinals ("externally finite objects") and the (decidable) $K$-finite objects ("internally finite objects") fail to coincide.

* In $Sh(X)$, the decidable K-finite objects are those that are "locally finite;" i.e. there is an open cover of $X$ such that over each open in the cover, the sheaf is a locally constant function to $N$.  These are essentially the same as [[covering space|covering spaces]] of $X$.

+--{.query}
_Toby_: I think that I\'ll move the internal stuff to [[finite object]], to keep each page relatively short.

By the way, do I understand you correctly that 'finite object' in topos theory by default means 'decidable K-finite object'?
=--