
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Group Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include group theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

$SO(10)$ is the [[special orthogonal group]] in [[dimension]] 10.   $Spin(10)$ is the [[spin group]] in [[dimension]] 10: this is the universal cover of $SO(10)$, which is its only connected double cover.  In the [[classification of simple Lie groups]], either of these groups falls under the entry [[D5]].

$Spin(10)$ the gauge group of an important [[grand unified theory]]: there is an inclusion $SU(5) \to Spin(10)$ and a 2-1 map $Spin(4) \times Spin(6) \to Spin(10)$, and the pullback of these is the Standard Model gauge group $S(U(2) \times U(3))$ ([BaezHuerta10](#BaezHuerta10)).  

In this grand unified theory, all the right-handed [[fermions]] and antifermions in one generation form of the Standard Model including a right-handed neutrino, lie in a single representation of $Spin(10)$, called the right-handed Weyl [[spinor representation]].  This is sometimes denoted by $\mathbf{16}$ because it is 16-dimensional.  Similarly, the left-handed fermions and antifermions lie in the left-handed Weyl spinor representation, which is the dual $\mathbf{16}\ast$.   

These representations can be constructed explicitly in a number of ways.  For example, they are commonly described as the even and odd subspaces of $\Lambda \mathbb{C}^5$.  A less commonly used octonionic description is below.

## Octonionic construction of representation

The group $Spin(10)$ has two 16-dimensional faithful irreducible complex representations called its left-handed and right-handed Weyl [[spinor representation]].   ([Bryant 20](#Bryant20)) constructs one of these using [[octonions]] as follows.   

For $(r,x) \in \mathbb{R} \oplus \mathbb{O}$ define a linear map $m_{r,x} \colon \mathbb{C} \otimes \mathbb{O}^2 \to \mathbb{C} \otimes \mathbb{O}^2$ as follows:

$$ m_{r,x} = i \left( \begin{array}{cc} r & C R_x \\ -C L_x & -r  \end{array}   \right) $$

where $r$ here denotes multiplication by the real number $r$ and $L_x, R_x, C \colon \mathbb{O} \to \mathbb{O}$ are left multiplication by the octonion $x$, right multiplication by $x$ and octonionic conjugation, respectively.  Since $m_{r,x}^2 = - r^2 -{|x|}^2$ this map induces an action of the [[Clifford algebra]] $Cliff(\mathbb{R} \oplus \mathbb{O})$ on $\mathbb{C} \otimes \mathbb{O}^2$.  (To be precise, this is Clifford algebra generated by 9 anticommuting square roots of *minus* 1).  One can show that this action gives an isomorphism of complex associative algebras

$$ Cliff(\mathbb{R} \oplus \mathbb{O}) \cong End(\mathbb{C} \otimes \mathbb{O}^2) $$

where $End(\mathbb{C} \otimes \mathbb{O}^2)$, the algebra of all complex-linear transformations of $\mathbb{C} \otimes \mathbb{O}^2$, is isomorphic to the algebra of $16 \times 16$ complex matrices.

The group $Spin(n+1)$ is contained in the even part of the [[Clifford algebra]] on $n+1$ anticommuting square roots of $-1$, which is isomorphic to the Clifford algebra on $n$ anticommuting square roots of $-1$.  Thus, $Spin(10)$ can be seen as a subgroup of $End(\mathbb{C} \otimes \mathbb{O}^2)$.
Bryant shows that in fact $Spin(10)$ is isomorphic to the group of linear transformations generated by elements

$$  \left( \begin{array}{cc} r & C R_x \\ -C L_x & r \end{array}   \right) $$

where $r \in \mathbb{R}$ and $x \in \mathbb{O}$ have $r^2 + {|x|}^2 = 1$, together with elements

$$  \left( \begin{array}{cc} \alpha & 0 \\ 0 & \alpha^{-1} \end{array}   \right) $$

where $\alpha \in \mathbb{C}$ has $|\alpha| = 1$.

This description of $Spin(10)$ makes manifest its 16-dimensional right-handed Weyl spinor representation, which is a faithful complex representation.  The left-handed Weyl spinor representation is the dual of this, which is not isomorphic.

## Related concepts

[[!include low dimensional rotation groups -- table]]

\linebreak

## References

### General

* {#Bryant20} [[Robert Bryant]], Notes on spinors in low dimension.   ([arXiv:2011.05568](https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.05568))

### As a grand unified gauge group

Discussion as a [[gauge group]] in [[grand unified theory]] (see [there](GUT#TheGUTKnownAsSO10)):

* {#BLM09} Stefano Bertolini, Luca Di Luzio, [[Michal Malinský]], _Intermediate mass scales in the non-supersymmetric SO(10) grand unification: a reappraisal_, Phys. Rev. D80:015013, 2009 ([arXiv:0903.4049](https://arxiv.org/abs/0903.4049))

review:

* [[Howard Georgi]], §24 in: *Lie Algebras In Particle Physics*, Westview Press (1999), CRC Press (2019) &lbrack;[doi:10.1201/9780429499210](https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429499210)&rbrack;

* {#Malinsky09} [[Michal Malinský]], _35 years of GUTs - where do we stand?_, 2009 ([pdf](https://www.mpi-hd.mpg.de/lin/seminar_theory/talks/Malinsky.pdf))

* {#BaezHuerta10} [[John Baez]] and [[John Huerta]], *The algebra of grand unified theories*, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 47 (2010), 483-552. ([arxiv:0904.1556](https://arxiv.org/abs/0904.1556))

for non-superymmetric [[model (physics)|models]]:

* {#LavouraWolfenstein10} L. Lavoura and Lincoln Wolfenstein, _Resuscitation of minimal $SO(10)$ grand unification_, Phys. Rev. D 48, 264 ([doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.48.264](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.48.264))

* {#AltarelliMeloni13} Guido Altarelli, Davide Meloni, _A non Supersymmetric SO(10) Grand Unified Model for All the Physics below $M_{GUT}$_ ([arXiv:1305.1001](https://arxiv.org/abs/1305.1001))

* {#DueckRodejohann13} Alexander Dueck, Werner Rodejohann, _Fits to $SO(10)$ Grand Unified Models_ ([arXiv:1306.4468](http://arxiv.org/abs/1306.4468))

* {#FongMeloni14} Chee Sheng Fong, Davide Meloni, Aurora Meroni, Enrico Nardi, _Leptogenesis in $SO(10)$_ ([arXiv:1412.4776](http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.4776))

  (in view of [[leptogenesis]])

* {#OhlssonPernow19} Tommy Ohlsson, Marcus Pernow, _Fits to Non-Supersymmetric SO(10) Models with Type I and II Seesaw Mechanisms Using Renormalization Group Evolution_ ([arXiv:1903.08241](https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.08241))

* {#CPS19} Mainak Chakraborty, M.K. Parida, Biswonath Sahoo, _Triplet Leptogenesis, Type-II Seesaw Dominance, Intrinsic Dark Matter, Vacuum Stability and Proton Decay in Minimal SO(10) Breakings_ ([arXiv:1906.05601](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05601))

  > Results indicating non-SUSY $SO(10)$ as self sufficient theory for neutrino masses, baryon asymmetry, dark matter, vacuum stability of SM scalar potential, origin of three gauge forces, and observed proton stability.

* Nobuchika Okada, Digesh Raut, Qaisar Shafi, _Inflation, Proton Decay, and Higgs-Portal Dark Matter in $SO(10) \times U(1)_\psi$_ ([arXiv:1906.06869](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.06869))

for [[supersymmetry|supersymmetric]] [[model (physics)|models]]:

* Archana Anandakrishnan, B. Charles Bryant, Stuart Raby, _LHC Phenomenology of $SO(10)$ Models with Yukawa Unification II_ ([arXiv:1404.5628](http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.5628))

* Ila Garg, _New minimal supersymmetric $SO(10)$ GUT phenomenology and its cosmological implications_ ([arXiv:1506.05204](http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.05204))


On [[symmetry breaking]] in [[Spin(10)]]-[[grand unified theory]] to the exact [[standard model of particle physics|standard model]] [[gauge group]], via [[real normed division algebra]] ([[octonions]], [[quaternions]]):

* [[Kirill Krasnov]], *Geometry of $Spin(10)$ Symmetry Breaking* &lbrack;[arXiv:2209.05088](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.05088)&rbrack;

* [[Nichol Furey]], M. J. Hughes, *Division algebraic symmetry breaking* &lbrack;[arXiv:2210.10126](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.10126)&rbrack;





[[!redirects Spin(10)]]