Derivatives and differentials are usually expressed in terms of limits in the sense of analysis. However it became clear in last about half a century that much of the knowledge on differential calculus can be inferred from using just algebraic properties of differentials and derivatives, most notably the Leibniz rule; an alternative [[synthetic differential geometry|synthetic]] formalism also appeared which did not use limiting procedures as well. A [[derivation]] of an associative algebra is simply a linear [[endomorphism]] satisfying the Leibniz rule. Then for example the vector fields on a manifold are obtained as derivatives of the algebra of $C^\infty$-functions on the manifold. The differential of a map is a linearized approximation. This is clear in various non-classical analytic setups, for example for maps between [[Banach spaces]] and for differentiable manifolds. 

This linearization idea has been obtained at the level of sheaves of $\mathcal{O}$-modules by [Grothendieck](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Grothendieck) for the algebraic varieties with the view toward the differential calculus in for varieties in prime characteristics. It is interesting that he related differential calculus to resolutions of the diagonal, where he considered the sheaves of modules supported on infinitesimal neighborhoods of diagonal. Indeed, to define a derivative in analysis, one needs to start with consideration of differences of values of a function at points which are close one to another $x$ and $x+\Delta x$; what means that the pair $(x,x+\Delta x)$ is close to the diagonal of the cartesian square $X\times X$. In numerical analysis various approximation schemas for higher order differential operators are involved which obviously live around higher digonals in $X\times X\times\ldots \times X$ ($n$ times). One of the products of that thinking is Grothendieck's notion of a [[regular differential operator]]. This lead later to the creation of the theory of [[D-modules]] which are sheaves of modules over the [[sheaf]] of regular differentual operators over a scheme, or a complex analytic manifold.

We plan in nlab to cover many aspetcs of the interaction between geometry and differential calculi of various sort including [[synthetic differential geometry]] and algebaric counterparts of notions from differential calculi. It is hard to say, however, where homological algebra belongs: the differential in the sense of homological algebra is rather a notion which can be systematized into more general subject of homotopical algebra, but in some cases it is related to analogues of [[exterior differentiation]] for de Rham [[complex]] of differential forms (say on manifolds). But there is also an analogue of the Taylor series for functors in some homotopical contexts (say Goodwillie calculus). 

See [[derivation]], [[regular differential operator]], [[differential form]], [[differential bimodule]], [[differential forms in synthetic differential geometry]], [[connection]], [[connection for a differential graded algebra]], [[D-module]]...



