{:myproof: .proof style="margin-left:2em;"}
{:mynumdef: .num_defn style="border:solid #cccccc;border-width:2px 1px;padding:0 1em;margin:0 1em;"}
{:goal: style="border:solid #0000cc;background: #add8e6;border-width:2px 1px;padding:0 1em;margin:0 1em;"}
+-- {: goal}
###### Lexicon entry on
##Bar  and cobar constructions

* There is a brief entry at [[bar construction]] together with a blog link

   * [[Todd Trimble]], _On the Bar Construction_ ([blog](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2007/05/on_the_bar_construction.html))

* There is some discussion of the bar-cobar adjointness as it related to [[twisting cochain|twisting cochains]], at that entry.

Here we will concentrate on the bar-cobar adjointness itself and start exploring the links with other parts of differential algebra.


(The previous entry in this lexicon can be found at [[differential graded Hopf algebra]].) 
=--

##The Bar construction

(due originally Eilenberg-MacLane)
\[B :pre \varepsilon CDGA \to pre CDGHA\]
Let $(A,d,\varepsilon) $ be a commutative, augmented differential $\mathbb{Z}$-graded algebra, $d(A_n)\subseteq A_{n-1}$, $\overline{A} = Ker \varepsilon$.  

##Definition

The _bar construction_ $B(A,d,\varepsilon)$ is given by 
$$B(A,d,\varepsilon) = (T(s\overline{A}), D),$$
where 

*  $T(s\overline{A})$ is the commutative [[differential graded Hopf algebra]] generated by $s\overline{A}$, $s$ being the _suspension_ (shift, translation, etc) operator discussed in [[graded vector space|graded vector spaces]],


*  $D = d_I + d_E$, where

$$d_I(sa_1\otimes \ldots\otimes sa_n) = -\sum_{i = 1} ^n\eta(i-1)sa_1\otimes \ldots \otimes sa_{i-2}\otimes sda_{i-1}\otimes\ldots sa_n,$$ 

and

$$d_E(sa_1\otimes \ldots\otimes sa_n) = -\sum_{i = 1} ^n\eta(i-1)sa_1\otimes \ldots \otimes sa_{i-2}\otimes sa_{i-1}.a_i\otimes \ldots sa_n,$$ 

with $\eta(i) = (-1)^{\sum_{k=1}^i |sa_k|}$.

**Note** that _the image of a 1-connected cdga is a connected commutative Hopf algebra_.


## The Cobar construction

(due to J. F. Adams)

The idea is if we have a chain complex model, $C_*(X)$, for a CW-complex, $X$, (usually the complex of cellular chains on $X$),  can we construct from $C_*(X)$ a 'model' for the chain complex of  the loop space $\Omega X$ of $X$. Adams' cobar construction was such a method.

We define a functor:



\[F :pre \eta  CoDGC \to pre CoDGHA\]

so essentially from cocommutative [[differential graded coalgebra|differential graded coalgebras]] to  cocommutative [[differential graded Hopf algebra|differential graded Hopf algebras]] (with frills attached in the way of coaugmentations, etc).

Let $(C,\partial,\eta)$ be a cocommutative differential $\mathbb{Z}$-graded coaugmented coalgeba:

$$\partial(C_n) \subseteq C_{n-1},  \quad \overline{C} = C/\eta(k), \quad \overline{\Delta} : \overline{C} \to \overline{C}\otimes \overline{C}.$$

The _Cobar construction_ $F(C,\partial, \eta)$ is the cocommutative pre-dgha defined by 

* $F(C,\partial,\eta) = (T(s^{-1}\overline{C}), \delta)$,
 where $\delta = \partial_I + \partial_E$.  

Here 

*  $T(s^{-1}\overline{C})$ is the cocommutative Hopf algebra generated by $s^{-1}\overline{C}$, as before(in [[differential graded coalgebra]]) $\overline{C}$ is the cokernel of the coaugmentation, $\eta$)

*   $$\partial_I (s^{-1}c_1\otimes \ldots\otimes s^{-1}c_n) = -\sum_{i = 1} ^n\eta(i-1)s^{-1}c_1\otimes \ldots\otimes s^{-1}c_{i-1}\otimes s^{-1}\partial c_i\otimes \ldots s^{-1}c_n,$$

and 

*  $$\partial_E (s^{-1}c_1\otimes \ldots\otimes s^{-1}c_n) = -\sum_{i = 1} ^n\eta(i-1)\sum_\mu (-1)^{|c'_{i\mu}| +1} (s^{-1}c_1\otimes \ldots\otimes s^{-1}c'_{i\mu}\otimes  s^{-1}c^{\prime\prime}_{i\mu}\otimes \ldots\otimes s^{-1}c_n),$$
with $\overline{\Delta}c_i = \sum_\mu c'_{i\mu}\otimes  c^{\prime\prime}_{i\mu}$; $\eta(i) = (-1)^{ \sum^i_{k=1}|s^{-1}c_k|}.$

The image of a 1-connected cdgc is a connected cocommutative dgha.

If $C$ is of finite type, $\#F(C,\partial,\eta)$ is isomorphic to $B\#(C,\partial,\eta)$ as a differential $\mathbb{Z}$-graded Hopf algebra.



If $A$ is not (graded) commutative, the differential $d_E$ of $B(A,d,\varepsilon)$ does not respect the shuffle product on $T(s\overline{A})$; $B(A,d,\varepsilon)$ thus becomes merely a differential $\mathbb{Z}$-graded coalgebra.  Similarly if $C$ is not (graded) cocommutative $F(C,\partial,\eta)$ is merely a differential $\mathbb{Z}$-graded algebra.

In particular, let

*  $\varepsilon-DGA$ be the category of augmented differential graded algebras, ($A = \oplus_{p\geq 0}A_p$).

* $DGC_0$, the category of connected differential graded coalgebras,

then the Bar and Cobar constructions yield functors

$$B: \varepsilon DGA\to DGC_0$$

$$F : DGC_0\to  \varepsilon DGA.$$


+-- {: .num_theorem #}
###### Proposition

(Husemoller-Moore-Stasheff)

$B$ is right adjoint to $F$.

For any objects $(A,d)$ in $\varepsilon-DGA$, and $(C,\partial)$ of $DGC_0$, the natural adjunction morphisms

$$\hat{\alpha} : FB(A,d) \to (A,d)$$

$$\hat{\beta} : (C,\partial) \to BF(C,\partial)$$

are weak equivalences.

=--

These latter morphisms are defined by

* $\hat{\alpha} : T(s^{-1}\overline{T(s\overline{A})}), \delta)\to (A,d)$ is the zero mapping on $s^{-1}T^{\geq 2}(s\overline{A})$ and the natural isomorphism $s^{-1}s\overline{A} \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} \overline{A}$ on $s^{-1}s\overline{A}$.

* $\hat{\beta} : (C,\partial) \to (T(\overline{sT(s^{-1}\overline{C}}),D)$ is the unique lifting of 
$$C\to s^{-1}\overline{C} \to \overline{T(s^{-1}\overline{C})}\to \overline{sT(s^{-1}\overline{C})}.$$

##References

The source used for this lexicon was 

D. Tanr&#233;, _Homotopie rationnelle: Mod&#232;les de Chen, Quillen, Sullivan_, Lecture Notes in Maths No. 1025, Springer, 1983.

This was augmented with material from

H. J. Baues, _Geometry of loop spaces and the cobar construction_, Mem. Amer.
Math. Soc. 25 (230) (1980) ix+171.

{:myproof: .proof style="margin-left:2em;"}
{:mynumdef: .num_defn style="border:solid #cccccc;border-width:2px 1px;padding:0 1em;margin:0 1em;"}
{:goal: style="border:solid #0000cc;background: #add8e6;border-width:2px 1px;padding:0 1em;margin:0 1em;"}
+-- {: goal}
###### Lexicon links onwards:

[[Tim Porter|Tim]]:  The lexicon  continues on a new entry on the links between differential graded algebras and differential graded Lie algebras. (I will provide a title when I have thought what to call it!) 
=--