
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Group Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include group theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}



## Idea

The _quaternion group_ of [[order of a group|order]] 8, $Q_8$, is the [[finite group|finite]] [[subgroup]] of the group [[SU(2)]] $\simeq S^3 \subset \mathbb{H}^4$ of unit [[quaternions]] which consists of the canonical four [[linear basis|basis]]-quaternions and their negatives:

$$
  Q_8
  \;=\;
  \big\{
     \pm 1,
     \, 
     \pm i
     \, 
     \pm i
     \, 
     \pm k
  \big\}
  \,.
$$

This is [[isomorphic|isomorphic]] to the [[binary dihedral group]] of the same [[order of a group|order]].

This order-8 quaternion group $Q_8$ is the first in a row of _generalized quaternion groups_ $Q_{4n}$ , also called **dicyclic groups** which in turn are part of an even larger family.

## Definition

The _dicyclic group_ of order $4n$, $n\geq 2$, is the [[group]] $Q_{4n}$ defined by the presentation $\langle x,y | x^{2n}= x^{n} y^{-2}=y^{-1}x y x=1\rangle$. The _quaternion group_ (of order 8) is $Q_{4n}$ for $n=2$.

## Properties

* $Q_{4n}$ is (isomorphic to) a finite subgroup of $\mathbb{H}^\ast$ as can be seen by taking generators $x=j$ and $y=\cos(\pi/n) + i\sin(\pi/n)$. For $n=2$ this simply yields the subgroup generated by $i$ and $j$.

* $Q_{4n}$ has another presentation as $\langle R, S, T | R^2=S^2=T^n=R S T\rangle$. $R S T$ as a power of each of the generators is central and $Q_{4n}/\langle R S T\rangle= D_{2n}$, where $D_{2n}=\langle R, S, T | R^2=S^2=T^n=R S T=1\rangle$ is the [[dihedral group]] of order $2n$.

* {#HamiltonianGroup} $Q_8$ is a **Hamiltonian group** i.e. a [[non-abelian group]] such that every [[subgroup]] is [[normal subgroup|normal]]. Moreover, a result by Baer (1933) says that every Hamiltonian group contains $Q_8$ as a [[subgroup]]! (cf. [Scott (1987, p.253](#Scott87))

* {#InclusionInLargerFininteSubgroupsOfSU2} among the [[finite subgroups of SU(2)]] (hence among all "finite quaternion groups") $Q_8$ is a proper [[subgroup]] precisely of the three exceptional cases:

  * $Q_8 \subset 2 T$ the [[binary tetrahedral group]] ([[normal subgroup|normal]]),

  * $Q_8 \subset 2 I$ the [[binary icosahedral group]] (not [[normal subgroup|normal]])

  * $Q_8 \subset 2 O$ the [[binary octahedral group]] ([[normal subgroup|normal]])

  (e.g. [Koca-Moc-Koca 16, p. 8](#KocaMocKoca16), pointing to [Coxeter-Moser 65](#CoxeterMoser65) and [Coxeter 73](#Coxeter73))

* $Q_8$ is the multiplicative part of the quaternionic near-field $J_9$. (cf. [Weibel (2007)](#Weibel07))

## Related entries

* [[quaternion]]

* [[dihedral group]]

* [[canonical formula of myth]]

## Related pages

* wikipedia entry ([link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quaternion_group))

## References

* [[Kenneth Brown|Kenneth S. Brown]], _Cohomology of Groups_ , GTM **87** Springer Heidelberg 1982. (pp.98-101)

* H. S. M. Coxeter, _The binary polyhedral groups, and other generalizations of the quaternion group_ , Duke Math. J. **7** no.1 (1940) pp.367--379.

* T. Y. Lam, _Hamilton's Quaternions_ , pp.429-454 in _Handbook of Algebra III_ , Elsevier Amsterdam 2004.  ([preprint](http://math.berkeley.edu/~lam/quat.ps))

* {#Scott87}W. R. Scott, _Group Theory_ , Dover New York 1987. (pp.189-194, 252-254)

* {#Weibel07}[[Charles Weibel]], _Survey of Non-Desarguesian Planes_ , Notices of the AMS **54**  no.10 (2007) pp.1294&#8211;1303. ([pdf](http://www.ams.org/notices/200710/tx071001294p.pdf))

* {#KocaMocKoca16} Mehmet Koca, Ramazan Koç, Nazife Ozdes Koca, _Two groups $2^3.PSL_2(7)$ and $2^3:PSL_2(7)$ of order 1344_ ([arXiv:1612.06107](https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.06107))

* {#CoxeterMoser65} H.S.M.  Coxeter, W.  O.  J.  Moser, _Generators  and  Relations  for  Discrete Groups_, (Springer  Verlag,  1965);  

* {#Coxeter73} H.S.M.  Coxeter,  _Regular  Complex  Polytopes_ (Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 1973).


[[!redirects quaternionic group]]
[[!redirects dicyclic group]]
[[!redirects generalized quaternion group]]
[[!redirects quaternion groups]]
[[!redirects dicyclic groups]]
[[!redirects quaternionic groups]]
