#Classical Model Structure#

The classical [[model category|model structure]] on simplicial sets has the following distinguished classes of morphisms:

* The cofibrations $C$ are monomorphisms, equivalently, levelwise injections.

* The weak equivalences $W$ are **weak homotopy equivalences**, i.e., morphisms whose [[simplicial set|geometric realization]] is a weak homotopy equivalence of topological spaces.

* The fibrations $F$ are the **Kan fibrations**, i.e., maps which have the right lifting property with respect to all horn inclusions.

All simplicial sets are cofibrant with respect to this model structure. The fibrant objects are precisely the [[Kan complex|Kan complexes]].

This model structure is cofibrantly generated by sets $I$ of boundary inclusions $\partial \Delta[n] \hookrightarrow \Delta[n]$ and $J$ of horn inclusions.

Importantly, this model structure is Quillen equivalent to the [[model structure on topological spaces]] with weak homotopy equivalences as weak equivalences and Serre fibrations as fibrations via the geometric realization and total singular complex functors described [[simplicial set|here]].

#Joyal's Model Structure#

There is a second model structure on simplicial sets, due to Joyal, with the following distinguished classes of morphisms:

* The cofibrations $C$ are monomorphisms, equivalently, levelwise injections.

* The weak equivalences $W$ are **weak categorical equivalences**, which are morphisms $u : A \rightarrow B$ of simplicial sets such that the induced map $u^* : X^B \rightarrow X^A$ of internal-homs for all [[quasi-category|quasi-categories]] $X$ induces an isomorphism when applying the functor $\tau_0$ that takes a simplicial set to the set of isomorphism classes of objects of its fundamental category.

* The fibrations $F$ are called variously **isofibrations** or **quasi-fibrations**. As always, these are determined by the classes $C$ and $W$.
Quasi-fibrations between Kan complexes they have a relatively simple description; they are precisely the maps that have the right lifting property with respect to the inner horn inclusions and also the inclusion $j_0 : * \rightarrow J$ where $*$ is the terminal simplicial set and $J$ is the nerve of the groupoid on two objects with one non-trivial isomorphism. 

All objects are cofibrantly generated. The fibrant objects are precisely the quasi-categories.

This model structure is cofibrantly generated. The generating cofibrations are the set $I$ described above. There is no known explicit description for the generating trivial cofibrations.

Importantly, this model structure is Quillen equivalent to several alternative model structures for the ''homotopy theory of homotopy theories" such as that on the category of [[simplicial enriched category|simplicially enriched categories]].

#Comparison#

Every weak categorical equivalences is a weak homotopy equivalence. Since both model structures have the same cofibrations, it follows that the classical model structure is a [[Bousfield localization]] of Joyal's model structure.