pages/1/6/2/0/261/content.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Content#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Simplicial sets generalize the idea of [[simplicial complexes]]: a _simplicial set_ is like a combinatorial space built up out of gluing abstract [[simplex|simplices]] to each other. Equivalently, it is an object equipped with a rule for how to consistently map the objects of the [[simplex category]] into it.

More concretely, a simplicial set $S$ is a collection of [[sets]] $S_n$ for $n \in \mathbb{N}$, so that elements in $S_n$ are to be thought of as $n$-[[simplex|simplices]], equipped with a rule that says:

* which $(n-1)$-simplices in $S_{n-1}$ are faces of which elements of $S_n$;
* which $(n+1)$-simplices are [[thin element|thin]] in that they are really just $n$-simplices regarded as degenerate $(n+1)$-simplices.

One of the main uses of simplicial sets is as combinatorial _models_ for  the (weak) [[homotopy type]] of [[topological spaces]]. They can also be taken as models for [[∞-groupoids]]. This is encoded in the [[model structure on simplicial sets]]. For more reasons why simplicial sets see MathOverflow [here](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/58497/is-there-a-high-concept-explanation-for-why-simplicial-leads-to-homotopy-theor).


## Definition
 {#Definition}

The quick abstract definition of a simplicial set goes as follows:

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A **simplicial set**  is a [[presheaf]] on the [[simplex category]] $\Delta$, that is, a [[functor]] $X : \Delta^{op} \to Sets$ from the [[opposite category]] of the [[simplex category]] to the category [[Set]] of [[sets]]; equivalently this a [[simplicial object]] in [[Set]].

Equipped with the standard [[homomorphisms]] of [[presheaf|presheaves]] as morphisms (namely [[natural transformation|natural transformations]] of the corresponding [[functors]]), simplicial sets form the category [[sSet]] (denoted both  $SSet$ or $sSet$). 


=--

Explicitly this means the following.

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition
**(simplicial set)**

A **simplicial set** $X \in sSet$ is 

* for each $n \in \mathbb{N}$ a [[set]] $X_n \in Set$ -- the **set of $n$-[[simplices]]**;

* for each [[injective map]] $\;\delta_i :\: [n-1] \to [n]\;$ of [[totally ordered sets]] ($[n] \coloneqq \{ 0 \lt 1 \lt \cdots \lt n \}$)

  a [[function]] $\;d_i :\: X_{n} \to X_{n-1}\;$ -- the $i$th _[[face map]]_ on $n$-simplices ($n \gt 0$ and $0 \leq i \leq n$);

* for each [[surjective map]] $\;\sigma_i :\: [n+1] \to [n]\;$ of totally ordered sets

  a function $\;s_i :\: X_{n} \to X_{n+1}\;$ -- the $i$th _[[degeneracy map]]_ on $n$-simplices ($n \geq 0$ and $0 \leq i \leq n$);

such that these functions satisfy the _[[simplicial identities]]_.


=--

{#SimplicialSetIdea} $\,$

<center>
<img src="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/SimplicialSetsIdea.jpg" width="700">
</center>

## Remarks

### Simplicial sets as spaces built of simplices

* The definition is to be understood from the point of view of [[space and quantity]]: a **simplicial set** is a space characterized by the fact that it may be _probed_ by mapping standard simplices into it: the set $S_n$ assigned by a simplicial set to the standard $n$-simplex $[n]$ is the **set of $n$-simplices** in this space, hence the way of mapping a standard $n$-simplex into this space.

* For $S$ a simplicial set, the **face map** 
  $$
    d_i \coloneqq S(\delta^i): S_n \rightarrow S_{n-1}
  $$ 
  is dual to the unique injection $\delta^i : [n-1] \rightarrow [n]$ in the category $\Delta$ whose image omits the element $i \in [n]$. 

* Similarly, the **degeneracy map** 
  $$
    s_i \coloneqq S(\sigma^i) : S_n \rightarrow S_{n+1}
  $$ 
  is dual to the unique surjection $\sigma^i : [n+1] \rightarrow [n]$ in $\Delta$ such that $i \in [n]$ has two elements in its preimage. 

* The maps $\delta^i$ and $\sigma^i$ satisfy certain obvious relations -- the [[simplicial identities]] -- dual to those  spelled out at [[simplex category]].


### Visualisation
(based on [[cubical set]])

The **face maps**  go from sets $S_{n+1}$ of $(n+1)$-dimensional simplices to the corresponding set $S_{n}$ of $n$-dimensional simplices and can be thought of as sending each simplex in the simplicial set to one of its faces, for instance for $n=1$ the set $S_2$ of 2-simplices would be sent in three different ways by three different face maps to the set of $1$-simplices, for instance one of the face maps would send

$$
  \left(
  \array{
       &          & b
     \\
       & \nearrow & \Downarrow^F & \searrow
     \\
     a &          & \rightarrow  &          & c
  }
  \right)
  \;\;
  \mapsto
  \;\;
  \left(
  \array{
       &          & b
     \\
       & \nearrow
     \\
     a
  }
  \right)
$$

another one would send

$$
  \left(
  \array{
       &          & b
     \\
       & \nearrow & \Downarrow^F & \searrow
     \\
     a &          & \rightarrow  &          & c
  }
  \right)
  \;\;
  \mapsto
  \;\;
  \left(
  \array{
     a &          & \rightarrow  &          & c
  }
  \right)
  \,.
$$

On the other hand, the **degeneracy maps** go the other way round and send sets $S_n$ of $n$-simplices to sets $S_{n+1}$ of $(n+1)$-simplices by regarding an $n$-simplex as a degenerate or "thin" $(n+1)$-simplex in the various different ways that this is possible. For instance, again for $n=1$, a degeneracy map may act by sending

$$
  \left(
  \array{
     a
     &\stackrel{f}{\to}&
     b
  }
  \right)
  \;\;
  \mapsto
  \;\;
  \left(
  \array{
       &            & b
     \\
       & \nearrow_f & \Downarrow^{Id} & \searrow^{Id}
     \\
     a &            & \stackrel{f}\to &               & b
  }
  \right)
  \,.
$$

Notice the $Id$-labels, which indicate that the edges and faces labeled by them are "[[thin element|thin]]" in much the same way as an [[identity morphism]] is thin. They depend on lower dimensional features,  (notice however that a simplicial set by itself is not equipped with any notion of composition of simplices, nor really, therefore, of identities.  See [[quasicategory]] for a kind of simplicial set which does have such notions and [[simplicial T-complex]] for more on the intuitions behind this idea of "thinness").


## Examples
 {#Examples}


### $n$-simplices (Yoneda embeddings)

Let $[n]$ denote the object of the [[simplex category]] $\Delta$ corresponding to the totally ordered set $\{ 0, 1, 2,\ldots, n\}$. Then the represented presheaf $\Delta(-, [n])$, typically written as $\Delta[n]$ is an example of a simplicial set. In particular we have $\Delta[n]_m=Hom_\Delta([m],[n])$ and hence $\Delta[n]_m$ is a finite set with $\binom{n+m+1}{n}$ elements.

By the Yoneda lemma, the $n$-simplices of a simplicial set $X$ are in natural bijective correspondence to maps $\Delta[n] \rightarrow X$ of simplicial sets.


### Cartesian products of simplices

The non-degenerate [[simplices]] in the simplicial set which is the [[Cartesian product]] 

$$
  \Delta[1] \times \Delta[2]
$$ 

of the [[1-simplex]] $\Delta[1]$ with the [[2-simplex]] $\Delta[2]$ (i.e. the canonical simplicial [[cylinder object]] over the [[2-simplex]]) is the simplicial set which looks as follows:

<img src="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/SimplicialCylinderOn2Simplex.jpg" width="240">

> graphics grabbed from [Friedman 08, p. 33](#Friedman08)


### Simplicial complexes

Every [[simplicial complex]] can be viewed a simplicial set (in several different ways).

<img src="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/ASimplicialComplex.jpg" width="180">

> graphics grabbed form [arXiv:1710.06129](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.06129)

<img src="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/AnotherSimplicialComplex.jpg" width="400">

> graphics grabbed from Maletic, 2013

In particular any graph is thought of as being built of vertices and edges and so is a (1-dimensional) simplicial complex. Choosing a direction on the edges then gives a directed graph and that gives a simplicial set, as follows.


### Directed graphs

A [[directed graph]] (with loops and multiple edges allowed, i.e., a [[quiver]]) $E \rightrightarrows V$ is essentially the same thing as a 1-dimensional simplicial set, by taking $S_0 \coloneqq V$ to be the set of vertices and $S_1 \coloneqq E \uplus V$ to be the disjoint union of the set of edges with the set of vertices (the latter corresponding to the degenerate 1-simplices).

### Nerve of a category

If $C$ is a small category, the **nerve** of $C$ is a simplicial set which we denote $NC$. If we intepret the poset $[n]$ defined above as a category, we define the $n$-simplices of $NC$ to be the set of functors $[n] \rightarrow C$. Equivalently, the $0$-simplices of $NC$ are the objects of $C$, the $1$-simplices are the morphisms, and the $n$-simplices are strings of $n$ composable arrows in $C$. Face maps are given by composition (or omission, in the case of $d_0$ and $d_n$) and degeneracy maps are given by inserting identity arrows.

### Singular simplicial complex of a topological space

Recall from [[simplex category]] or [[geometric realization]] the standard functor $\Delta \to Top$ which sends $[n] \in \Delta$ to the standard topological $n$-simplex $\Delta^n$.  This functor induces for every [[topological space]] $X$ the simplicial set
$$
  S X : [n] \mapsto Hom_{Top}(\Delta^n, X)
$$
called the **simplicial singular complex** of $X$. This simplicial set is always a [[Kan complex]] and may be regarded as the [[fundamental ∞-groupoid]] of $X$.

Following up on the idea of ''thinness'', a singular simplex $f: \Delta^n \to X$ may be called **thin** if it factors through a [[retraction]] $r: \Delta^n \to \Lambda^{n-1}_i$ to some horn of $\Delta^n$,  then the well known [[Kan complex|Kan]] condition on $S X$ can be strengthened to say that every horn in $S X$ has a _thin_ filler. This also helps to give some intuitive underpinning to the idea of [[thin element]] in this simplicial context.

### Bar construction

For the moment see _[[bar construction]]_.


## Properties

### Classifying topos

#### Simplicial sets

The category of simplicial sets is a [[presheaf category]], and so in particular a [[Grothendieck topos]].  In fact, it is the [[classifying topos]] of the theory of "intervals", meaning [[totally ordered sets]] equipped with distinct top and bottom elements.

Specifically, if $E$ is a topos containing such an interval $I$, then we obtain a functor $\Delta \to E$ sending $[n]$ to the subobject
$$ \{ (x_1,x_2,\dots,x_n) \;|\; x_1 \le x_2 \le \dots \le x_n \} \hookrightarrow I^n $$
The corresponding [[geometric realization]]/[[nerve]] [[adjunction]] $E \leftrightarrows Set^{\Delta^{op}}$ is the [[geometric morphism]] which classifies $I$.  In particular, the generic such interval is the simplicial 1-simplex $\Delta^1$; see [[generic interval]] for more.

The usual geometric realization into [[topological spaces]] cannot be obtained in this way precisely, since [[Top]] is not a topos.  However, there are [[Top]]-like categories which are toposes, such as [[Johnstone's topological topos]].

#### Cosimplicial sets

Similarly, also the category $Set^{\Delta}$ of cosimplicial sets is a classifying topos: for inhabited [[linear orders]]. See at _[[classifying topos]]_ the section _[For (inhabited) linear orders](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/classifying+topos#ForLinearOrders)_.

### As models in homotopy theory

(...) [[homotopy theory]] (...) [[Kan complex]] (...) [[quasi-category]] (...)

### Relation to dendroidal sets

For the moment see at _[[dendroidal set]]_ the section [Relation to simplicial sets](#http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/dendroidal+set#RelationToSimplicialSets)

## Variants

* A [[symmetric set]] is a simplicial set equipped with additional *transposition maps* $t^n_i: X_n \to X_n$ for $i=0,\ldots,n-1$.  These transition maps generate an [[action]] of the [[symmetric group]] on $X_n$ and satisfy certain commutation relations with the face and degeneracy maps.

## Related concepts

* [[simplicial map]]

* [[simplicial object]]

  * **simplicial set**
  
  * [[pointed simplicial set]]

  * [[simplicial object in an (∞,1)-category]]

* [[semi-simplicial object]]

  * [[semisimplicial set]]

* [[simplicial homotopy theory]]

* [[simplicial group]], [[reduced simplicial set]]

* [[bisimplicial set]]

* [[symmetric set]], [[cyclic set]], [[skew-simplicial set]]

* [[globular set]], [[cubical set]], [[cellular set]], [[dendroidal set]]



## References

The original definition is due to Eilenberg and Zilber, see §8 in

* [[Samuel Eilenberg]], [[Joseph A. Zilber]], _Semi-simplicial complexes and singular homology_, Annals of Mathematics 51:3 (1950), 499--513.

A pedagogical introduction to simplicial sets is

* {#Friedman08} Greg Friedman, _An elementary illustrated introduction to simplicial sets_ ([arXiv:0809.4221](http://arxiv.org/abs/0809.4221))

A very clear and explicit exposition on the basics of simplicial sets is

* [[Emily Riehl]], _A leisurely introduction to simplicial sets_, 2008, 14 pages ([pdf](http://www.math.jhu.edu/~eriehl/ssets.pdf)).

Another introduction is

* [[Francis Sergeraert]], _Introduction to Combinatorial Homotopy Theory_, July 7, 2013, [pdf](https://www-fourier.ujf-grenoble.fr/~sergerar/Papers/Trieste-Lecture-Notes.pdf).

An overview of [[simplicial homotopy theory]] is in

* [[André Joyal]], [[Myles Tierney]], _Notes on simplicial homotopy theory_, March 7, 2008, [pdf](http://mat.uab.cat/~kock/crm/hocat/advanced-course/Quadern47.pdf).


Four classical sources appeared between 1967 and 1971:

* [[Pierre Gabriel]], [[Michel Zisman]], [[Calculus of fractions and homotopy theory]].

* [[J. Peter May]], _Simplicial objects in algebraic topology_, Van Nostrand Mathematical Studies 11 (1967).

*  Edward B. Curtis, _Simplicial homotopy theory_, Advances in Mathematics 6 (1971) 107–209 [MR279808](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=279808) <https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-8708(71)90015-6>.

* [[Klaus Lamotke]], _Semisimpliziale algebraische Topologie_, Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften 147 (1968).



More advanced treatments include 

* [[Paul Goerss]], [[Rick Jardine]], _[[Simplicial homotopy theory]]_, Progress in Mathematics, Birkh&#228;user (1996)

Some more facts about homotopical aspects of simplicial sets are discussed in section 2 of

* {#Cisinski06} [[Denis-Charles Cisinski]], _[[joyalscatlab:Les préfaisceaux comme type d'homotopie]]_, Ast&#233;risque, Volume 308, Soc. Math. France (2006), 392 pages ([pdf](http://www.math.univ-toulouse.fr/~dcisinsk/ast.pdf))
 


category: topology

category: simplicial object

[[!redirects simplicial sets]]

[[!redirects cosimplicial set]]
[[!redirects cosimplicial sets]]

[[!redirects boundary map]]
[[!redirects boundary maps]]
[[!redirects face map]]
[[!redirects face maps]]
[[!redirects degeneracy map]]
[[!redirects degeneracy maps]]
[[!redirects coface map]]
[[!redirects coface maps]]
[[!redirects codegeneracy map]]
[[!redirects codegeneracy maps]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 162561 Update date: 2021-04-16 06:24:10+00:00 Page name: simplicial set

pages/1/6/2/0/261/content.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Content#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Simplicial sets generalize the idea of [[simplicial complexes]]: a _simplicial set_ is like a combinatorial space built up out of gluing abstract [[simplex|simplices]] to each other. Equivalently, it is an object equipped with a rule for how to consistently map the objects of the [[simplex category]] into it.

More concretely, a simplicial set $S$ is a collection of [[sets]] $S_n$ for $n \in \mathbb{N}$, so that elements in $S_n$ are to be thought of as $n$-[[simplex|simplices]], equipped with a rule that says:

* which $(n-1)$-simplices in $S_{n-1}$ are faces of which elements of $S_n$;
* which $(n+1)$-simplices are [[thin element|thin]] in that they are really just $n$-simplices regarded as degenerate $(n+1)$-simplices.

One of the main uses of simplicial sets is as combinatorial _models_ for  the (weak) [[homotopy type]] of [[topological spaces]]. They can also be taken as models for [[∞-groupoids]]. This is encoded in the [[model structure on simplicial sets]]. For more reasons why simplicial sets see MathOverflow [here](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/58497/is-there-a-high-concept-explanation-for-why-simplicial-leads-to-homotopy-theor).


## Definition
 {#Definition}

The quick abstract definition of a simplicial set goes as follows:

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A **simplicial set**  is a [[presheaf]] on the [[simplex category]] $\Delta$, that is, a [[functor]] $X : \Delta^{op} \to Sets$ from the [[opposite category]] of the [[simplex category]] to the category [[Set]] of [[sets]]; equivalently this a [[simplicial object]] in [[Set]].

Equipped with the standard [[homomorphisms]] of [[presheaf|presheaves]] as morphisms (namely [[natural transformation|natural transformations]] of the corresponding [[functors]]), simplicial sets form the category [[sSet]] (denoted both  $SSet$ or $sSet$). 


=--

Explicitly this means the following.

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition
**(simplicial set)**

A **simplicial set** $X \in sSet$ is 

* for each $n \in \mathbb{N}$ a [[set]] $X_n \in Set$ -- the **set of $n$-[[simplices]]**;

* for each [[injective map]] $\;\delta_i :\: [n-1] \to [n]\;$ of [[totally ordered sets]] ($[n] \coloneqq \{ 0 \lt 1 \lt \cdots \lt n \}$)

  a [[function]] $\;d_i :\: X_{n} \to X_{n-1}\;$ -- the $i$th _[[face map]]_ on $n$-simplices ($n \gt 0$ and $0 \leq i \leq n$);

* for each [[surjective map]] $\;\sigma_i :\: [n+1] \to [n]\;$ of totally ordered sets

  a function $\;s_i :\: X_{n} \to X_{n+1}\;$ -- the $i$th _[[degeneracy map]]_ on $n$-simplices ($n \geq 0$ and $0 \leq i \leq n$);

such that these functions satisfy the _[[simplicial identities]]_.


=--

{#SimplicialSetIdea} $\,$

<center>
<img src="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/SimplicialSetsIdea.jpg" width="700">
</center>

## Remarks

### Simplicial sets as spaces built of simplices

* The definition is to be understood from the point of view of [[space and quantity]]: a **simplicial set** is a space characterized by the fact that it may be _probed_ by mapping standard simplices into it: the set $S_n$ assigned by a simplicial set to the standard $n$-simplex $[n]$ is the **set of $n$-simplices** in this space, hence the way of mapping a standard $n$-simplex into this space.

* For $S$ a simplicial set, the **face map** 
  $$
    d_i \coloneqq S(\delta^i): S_n \rightarrow S_{n-1}
  $$ 
  is dual to the unique injection $\delta^i : [n-1] \rightarrow [n]$ in the category $\Delta$ whose image omits the element $i \in [n]$. 

* Similarly, the **degeneracy map** 
  $$
    s_i \coloneqq S(\sigma^i) : S_n \rightarrow S_{n+1}
  $$ 
  is dual to the unique surjection $\sigma^i : [n+1] \rightarrow [n]$ in $\Delta$ such that $i \in [n]$ has two elements in its preimage. 

* The maps $\delta^i$ and $\sigma^i$ satisfy certain obvious relations -- the [[simplicial identities]] -- dual to those  spelled out at [[simplex category]].


### Visualisation
(based on [[cubical set]])

The **face maps**  go from sets $S_{n+1}$ of $(n+1)$-dimensional simplices to the corresponding set $S_{n}$ of $n$-dimensional simplices and can be thought of as sending each simplex in the simplicial set to one of its faces, for instance for $n=1$ the set $S_2$ of 2-simplices would be sent in three different ways by three different face maps to the set of $1$-simplices, for instance one of the face maps would send

$$
  \left(
  \array{
       &          & b
     \\
       & \nearrow & \Downarrow^F & \searrow
     \\
     a &          & \rightarrow  &          & c
  }
  \right)
  \;\;
  \mapsto
  \;\;
  \left(
  \array{
       &          & b
     \\
       & \nearrow
     \\
     a
  }
  \right)
$$

another one would send

$$
  \left(
  \array{
       &          & b
     \\
       & \nearrow & \Downarrow^F & \searrow
     \\
     a &          & \rightarrow  &          & c
  }
  \right)
  \;\;
  \mapsto
  \;\;
  \left(
  \array{
     a &          & \rightarrow  &          & c
  }
  \right)
  \,.
$$

On the other hand, the **degeneracy maps** go the other way round and send sets $S_n$ of $n$-simplices to sets $S_{n+1}$ of $(n+1)$-simplices by regarding an $n$-simplex as a degenerate or "thin" $(n+1)$-simplex in the various different ways that this is possible. For instance, again for $n=1$, a degeneracy map may act by sending

$$
  \left(
  \array{
     a
     &\stackrel{f}{\to}&
     b
  }
  \right)
  \;\;
  \mapsto
  \;\;
  \left(
  \array{
       &            & b
     \\
       & \nearrow_f & \Downarrow^{Id} & \searrow^{Id}
     \\
     a &            & \stackrel{f}\to &               & b
  }
  \right)
  \,.
$$

Notice the $Id$-labels, which indicate that the edges and faces labeled by them are "[[thin element|thin]]" in much the same way as an [[identity morphism]] is thin. They depend on lower dimensional features,  (notice however that a simplicial set by itself is not equipped with any notion of composition of simplices, nor really, therefore, of identities.  See [[quasicategory]] for a kind of simplicial set which does have such notions and [[simplicial T-complex]] for more on the intuitions behind this idea of "thinness").


## Examples
 {#Examples}

### The empty simplicial set

The [[empty simplicial set]] is a simplicial set.

### $n$-simplices (Yoneda embeddings)

Let $[n]$ denote the object of the [[simplex category]] $\Delta$ corresponding to the totally ordered set $\{ 0, 1, 2,\ldots, n\}$. Then the represented presheaf $\Delta(-, [n])$, typically written as $\Delta[n]$ is an example of a simplicial set. In particular we have $\Delta[n]_m=Hom_\Delta([m],[n])$ and hence $\Delta[n]_m$ is a finite set with $\binom{n+m+1}{n}$ elements.

By the Yoneda lemma, the $n$-simplices of a simplicial set $X$ are in natural bijective correspondence to maps $\Delta[n] \rightarrow X$ of simplicial sets.


### Cartesian products of simplices

The non-degenerate [[simplices]] in the simplicial set which is the [[Cartesian product]] 

$$
  \Delta[1] \times \Delta[2]
$$ 

of the [[1-simplex]] $\Delta[1]$ with the [[2-simplex]] $\Delta[2]$ (i.e. the canonical simplicial [[cylinder object]] over the [[2-simplex]]) is the simplicial set which looks as follows:

<img src="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/SimplicialCylinderOn2Simplex.jpg" width="240">

> graphics grabbed from [Friedman 08, p. 33](#Friedman08)


### Simplicial complexes

Every [[simplicial complex]] can be viewed a simplicial set (in several different ways).

<img src="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/ASimplicialComplex.jpg" width="180">

> graphics grabbed form [arXiv:1710.06129](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.06129)

<img src="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/AnotherSimplicialComplex.jpg" width="400">

> graphics grabbed from Maletic, 2013

In particular any graph is thought of as being built of vertices and edges and so is a (1-dimensional) simplicial complex. Choosing a direction on the edges then gives a directed graph and that gives a simplicial set, as follows.


### Directed graphs

A [[directed graph]] (with loops and multiple edges allowed, i.e., a [[quiver]]) $E \rightrightarrows V$ is essentially the same thing as a 1-dimensional simplicial set, by taking $S_0 \coloneqq V$ to be the set of vertices and $S_1 \coloneqq E \uplus V$ to be the disjoint union of the set of edges with the set of vertices (the latter corresponding to the degenerate 1-simplices).

### Nerve of a category

If $C$ is a small category, the **nerve** of $C$ is a simplicial set which we denote $NC$. If we intepret the poset $[n]$ defined above as a category, we define the $n$-simplices of $NC$ to be the set of functors $[n] \rightarrow C$. Equivalently, the $0$-simplices of $NC$ are the objects of $C$, the $1$-simplices are the morphisms, and the $n$-simplices are strings of $n$ composable arrows in $C$. Face maps are given by composition (or omission, in the case of $d_0$ and $d_n$) and degeneracy maps are given by inserting identity arrows.

### Singular simplicial complex of a topological space

Recall from [[simplex category]] or [[geometric realization]] the standard functor $\Delta \to Top$ which sends $[n] \in \Delta$ to the standard topological $n$-simplex $\Delta^n$.  This functor induces for every [[topological space]] $X$ the simplicial set
$$
  S X : [n] \mapsto Hom_{Top}(\Delta^n, X)
$$
called the **simplicial singular complex** of $X$. This simplicial set is always a [[Kan complex]] and may be regarded as the [[fundamental ∞-groupoid]] of $X$.

Following up on the idea of ''thinness'', a singular simplex $f: \Delta^n \to X$ may be called **thin** if it factors through a [[retraction]] $r: \Delta^n \to \Lambda^{n-1}_i$ to some horn of $\Delta^n$,  then the well known [[Kan complex|Kan]] condition on $S X$ can be strengthened to say that every horn in $S X$ has a _thin_ filler. This also helps to give some intuitive underpinning to the idea of [[thin element]] in this simplicial context.

### Bar construction

For the moment see _[[bar construction]]_.


## Properties

### Classifying topos

#### Simplicial sets

The category of simplicial sets is a [[presheaf category]], and so in particular a [[Grothendieck topos]].  In fact, it is the [[classifying topos]] of the theory of "intervals", meaning [[totally ordered sets]] equipped with distinct top and bottom elements.

Specifically, if $E$ is a topos containing such an interval $I$, then we obtain a functor $\Delta \to E$ sending $[n]$ to the subobject
$$ \{ (x_1,x_2,\dots,x_n) \;|\; x_1 \le x_2 \le \dots \le x_n \} \hookrightarrow I^n $$
The corresponding [[geometric realization]]/[[nerve]] [[adjunction]] $E \leftrightarrows Set^{\Delta^{op}}$ is the [[geometric morphism]] which classifies $I$.  In particular, the generic such interval is the simplicial 1-simplex $\Delta^1$; see [[generic interval]] for more.

The usual geometric realization into [[topological spaces]] cannot be obtained in this way precisely, since [[Top]] is not a topos.  However, there are [[Top]]-like categories which are toposes, such as [[Johnstone's topological topos]].

#### Cosimplicial sets

Similarly, also the category $Set^{\Delta}$ of cosimplicial sets is a classifying topos: for inhabited [[linear orders]]. See at _[[classifying topos]]_ the section _[For (inhabited) linear orders](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/classifying+topos#ForLinearOrders)_.

### As models in homotopy theory

(...) [[homotopy theory]] (...) [[Kan complex]] (...) [[quasi-category]] (...)

### Relation to dendroidal sets

For the moment see at _[[dendroidal set]]_ the section [Relation to simplicial sets](#http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/dendroidal+set#RelationToSimplicialSets)

## Variants

* A [[symmetric set]] is a simplicial set equipped with additional *transposition maps* $t^n_i: X_n \to X_n$ for $i=0,\ldots,n-1$.  These transition maps generate an [[action]] of the [[symmetric group]] on $X_n$ and satisfy certain commutation relations with the face and degeneracy maps.

## Related concepts

* [[simplicial map]]

* [[simplicial object]]

  * **simplicial set**
  
  * [[pointed simplicial set]]

  * [[simplicial object in an (∞,1)-category]]

* [[semi-simplicial object]]

  * [[semisimplicial set]]

* [[simplicial homotopy theory]]

* [[simplicial group]], [[reduced simplicial set]]

* [[bisimplicial set]]

* [[symmetric set]], [[cyclic set]], [[skew-simplicial set]]

* [[globular set]], [[cubical set]], [[cellular set]], [[dendroidal set]]



## References

The original definition is due to Eilenberg and Zilber, see §8 in

* [[Samuel Eilenberg]], [[Joseph A. Zilber]], _Semi-simplicial complexes and singular homology_, Annals of Mathematics 51:3 (1950), 499--513.

A pedagogical introduction to simplicial sets is

* {#Friedman08} Greg Friedman, _An elementary illustrated introduction to simplicial sets_ ([arXiv:0809.4221](http://arxiv.org/abs/0809.4221))

A very clear and explicit exposition on the basics of simplicial sets is

* [[Emily Riehl]], _A leisurely introduction to simplicial sets_, 2008, 14 pages ([pdf](http://www.math.jhu.edu/~eriehl/ssets.pdf)).

Another introduction is

* [[Francis Sergeraert]], _Introduction to Combinatorial Homotopy Theory_, July 7, 2013, [pdf](https://www-fourier.ujf-grenoble.fr/~sergerar/Papers/Trieste-Lecture-Notes.pdf).

An overview of [[simplicial homotopy theory]] is in

* [[André Joyal]], [[Myles Tierney]], _Notes on simplicial homotopy theory_, March 7, 2008, [pdf](http://mat.uab.cat/~kock/crm/hocat/advanced-course/Quadern47.pdf).


Four classical sources appeared between 1967 and 1971:

* [[Pierre Gabriel]], [[Michel Zisman]], [[Calculus of fractions and homotopy theory]].

* [[J. Peter May]], _Simplicial objects in algebraic topology_, Van Nostrand Mathematical Studies 11 (1967).

*  Edward B. Curtis, _Simplicial homotopy theory_, Advances in Mathematics 6 (1971) 107–209 [MR279808](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=279808) <https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-8708(71)90015-6>.

* [[Klaus Lamotke]], _Semisimpliziale algebraische Topologie_, Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften 147 (1968).



More advanced treatments include 

* [[Paul Goerss]], [[Rick Jardine]], _[[Simplicial homotopy theory]]_, Progress in Mathematics, Birkh&#228;user (1996)

Some more facts about homotopical aspects of simplicial sets are discussed in section 2 of

* {#Cisinski06} [[Denis-Charles Cisinski]], _[[joyalscatlab:Les préfaisceaux comme type d'homotopie]]_, Ast&#233;risque, Volume 308, Soc. Math. France (2006), 392 pages ([pdf](http://www.math.univ-toulouse.fr/~dcisinsk/ast.pdf))
 


category: topology

category: simplicial object

[[!redirects simplicial sets]]

[[!redirects cosimplicial set]]
[[!redirects cosimplicial sets]]

[[!redirects boundary map]]
[[!redirects boundary maps]]
[[!redirects face map]]
[[!redirects face maps]]
[[!redirects degeneracy map]]
[[!redirects degeneracy maps]]
[[!redirects coface map]]
[[!redirects coface maps]]
[[!redirects codegeneracy map]]
[[!redirects codegeneracy maps]]
