See [[n-fibration]].

+--{+ .query}
[[Zoran Skoda]]: I like the expansion (by Mike I guess) which is now in the entry n-fibration, it is instructive and a strong novelty of the nlab (is there more to read on the weak case somewhere?). However, I would prefer that for the case of STRICT n-categories, for which I intended the fibered n category entry when I created it; that we keep the original name and original definition (thus talking about n-cartesian
cells, regardless that it is evil, and one should expand on that). Grothendieck, Gabriel and Gray discovered fibered (strict) 1- and 2- categories and called them fibered 1- or 2-categories; Hermida generalized to strict n and Bunge is following , also under the same name: so let us keep the explicit version for the strict n-categories under the name fibered n category and with "evil" definition (which is very useful in my practice, at least for n=2); and lets us keep homotopically-biased title n-fibration for the weak n-category version. Of course, no hurry, in due time...And also having an entry fibered 2-category for the case of strict 2-categories where hermida has two different but equivalent definitions. Does that make sense to you ? Mike, Toby, Urs ?

[[Toby Bartels]]:  If these are useful to you, then we should certainly have an article on them.  But can we put it at [[strict fibered n-category]]? (or [[fibered strict n-category]] if you don\'t want to imply that there\'s anything strict about how the strict $n$-category is fibred).  Besides the hyphen (which is a technicality), one of the biases of the $n$-Lab is that the default notion of $n$-category is weak.  Of course, people who work with strict $n$-categories don\'t share that bias, so we won\'t quite match their language.

[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: I'm with Toby.  When we mean strict, we should say strict.  I don't think '$n$-fibration' is 'homotopically biased' either; plenty of people say 'fibration' rather than 'fibered category.'

The level of strictness in Hermida's definition is a bit puzzling to me.  A 2-fibration $E\to B$ in his sense corresponds to an (appropriately contravariant) functor $B\to 2Cat$, but neither to a fully strict 3-functor nor a fully weak one.  (This has nothing to do with the evilness of requiring on-the-nose cartesian lifts rather than up-to-iso ones, that is rather about strictness of the equivalence between fibrations and pseudofunctors.)  But if you think it is important, we should certainly have a page on it.

[[Zoran Skoda]]: I am not really a conformer to the nlab conventions, I always say weak when I mean weak in my own work; but I am happy with conforming in the nlab entry (i just did not think of weak case when writing the oroiginal entry). I also agree iwth the hyphen, I noticed that afvter submitting v1. As far as "plenty of people say 'fibration' rather than 'fibered category.'" Yes, people doing homotopy/topology, not a single algebraic geometer, 
who are the main consumers of
Grothendieck's definition, and have direct and inverse image functors all over the place. Thus the terminology is homotopically biased, at least in social sense. I am a bit puzzled about the statement of semi-strictness you say; I used this definition in a number of examples of mine and it was always working' maybe my perception of what should be a 2-pseudofunctor is not good as well. But one should also compare with Gray's universal property in the formal/adjointness book. I think fibered strict n-category is better than strict fibered n-category. The thing is that sometimes in expositions people use fibered category actually for pseudofunctor, then one would think that strict
in the sense of functor. There is also a curiousity (used by Thomason) that Grothendieck construction works for lax functors in fact. Gorghendieck construction for n=2 has been studied by hermida (though he has just few words on it) so I doubt he woudl not have the correspondence with teh coprrect generality of 2-pseduofunctors. Igro and I were doing some ground work on the 2-Groth constr but we did not do complete equivalence of 2-categories, just some other aspects, so i can not claim myself. 
=--

category: redirect
