
When in a [[convenient category of topological spaces]], e.g. [[compactly generated space]]s, there is an [[adjunction]] between the mapping space and the product in that category.
For general [[topological space]]s there is no globally defined adjunction, instead we need some conditions. Here is the statement containing all the subtleties.


For $C$ a [[finitely complete category|category with finite products]], recall that an object $c$ is **[[exponentiable object|exponentiable]]** if the functor $c \times -: C \to C$ has a [[right adjoint]], usually denoted $(-)^c: C \to C$. 

+-- {: .un_theorem}
###### Theorem (Exponentiability) 
Let [[Top]] be the category of all topological spaces. An object $X$ of $Top$ is exponentiable if and only if $X$ satisfies either of these equivalent conditions:

* $X \times -: Top \to Top$ preserves [[coequalizer]]s. Notice that $X \times -: Top \to Top$ always preserves [[coproducts]], so this condition is the same as that $X \times -$ preserves [[colimits]]. This is equivalent to exponentiability by the [[adjoint functor theorem]]. 

* $X$ is **core-compact**: for every open neighborhood $U$ of a point $x$, there exists an open neighborhood $V$ of $x$ such that for every open cover of $U$, there exists a finite subcover of $V$. This is a theorem of hard topology, not abstract nonsense like the previous one.

=--

If $X$ is [[Hausdorff space|Hausdorff]], then core-compactness is equivalent to [[locally compact space|local compactness]]. 

If $X$ is core-compact, then the topology on $Y^X$ (whose points are identified with continuous maps $f: X \to Y$) is generated by [[topological basis|subbasis]] elements $O_{U,V}$, for $U$ an open subset of $X$ and $V$ an open subset of $Y$; a continuous map $f\colon X \to Y$ belongs to $O_{U,V}$ iff every open cover of $f^{-1}(V)$ admits a finite subcover of $U$:

$$ O_{U, V} = \{f \in Y^X: every open cover of f^{-1}(V) admits a finite subcover of U\} .$$ 

If $X$ and $Y$ are Hausdorff, then the topology on $Y^X$ coincides with the [[compact-open topology]]. 

Further remarks should be made which connect this to the theory of [[continuous lattice]]s (essentially, a space is exponentiable if its topology is a continuous lattice). 


Denote by $Map(X,Y)=X^Y$ the space of continuous maps $X\to Y$ in the [[compact-open topology]].

+-- {: .un_theorem}
###### Theorem (Exponential law)
Let
$X,Y,B$ be [[topological spaces]]. For any $f\in B^{X\times Y}$,
the formula
$$
[(\theta f)(y)](x) = f(x,y)
$$
defines a [[continuous map]] $\theta f:Y\to B^X$
which we call the map adjoint to $f$, or the [[adjunct]] of $f$.

The adjunction map
$$
\theta : Map(X\times Y,B)\to Map(Y,B^X), \,\,\,\,\,\,\,\theta:f\mapsto \theta f
$$
is a [[one-to-one function]], and if $X$ is [[locally compact space|locally compact and Hausdorff]] then $\theta$ is a [[bijection]].
Independently from that assumption on $X$, if $Y$ is
[[Hausdorff space|Hausdorff]], then $\theta$ is continuous in the [[compact-open topology]]
$$
\theta : B^{X\times Y}\to (B^X)^Y.
$$

If both assumptions (on $X$ and $Y$) are satisfied, then
$\theta$ is not only a continuous bijection, but also open, hence a [[homeomorphism]].
=--

There is also a version for based (= [[pointed space|pointed]]) topological spaces. The [[cartesian product]] then needs to be replace by the [[smash product]] of the based spaces. Regarding that the maps preserve the base point, the adjunction map $\theta$ induces the adjunction map

 $$\theta_*:Map_*(X\wedge Y,B)\to Map_*(Y,B^X)$$

where the mapping space $Map_*$ for based spaces is the subspace of the usual mapping space, in the compact-open topology, which consists of the mappings preserving the base point. 

It appears that $\theta_*$ is again one-to-one and continuous, and it is bijective if $X$ is locally compact Hausdorff. If $Y$ is also Hausdorff then $\theta_*$ is a homeomorphism. 

## Reference 

M. Escardo and R. Heckmann, [Topologies of spaces of continuous functions](http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~mhe/papers/newyork.pdf), 2001. 


[[!redirects exponential law for topological spaces]]
[[!redirects exponential law for based spaces]]