
#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

#Idea#

A computad is a formal device (due to [[Ross Street]]) for describing "generators" of $n$-[[n-category|categories]], much as [[directed graph]]s describe generators of [[category|categories]]. Originally the $n$-categories under consideration were [[strict n-category|strict]], but more recently the concept of $n$-computad has been expanded to take into account weak $n$-categories.  The notion is tied to [[algebraic definition of higher category|algebraic]] senses of higher categories, but computads can also be used as the input for [[geometric definition of higher category|geometric]] senses as well.


#Terminology#

The article

* [[Albert Burroni]], _Higher dimensional word problems with applications to equational logic_ ([pdf](http://people.math.jussieu.fr/~burroni/mapage/highwordpb.pdf))

used term **polygraph** for _computad_ . This term is now used in parts of the literature.  Since "computad" is 20 years older, it should probably be preferred. 


# Definitions #

First we work in Street's original strict setting. 

An **n-computad** is defined recursively as follows: 

1. A 0-computad is a [[set]]; 

1. The data of an $n$-computad consists of an $(n-1)$-computad $\mathcal{C}$, a set $C_n$, and [[source]] and [[target]] maps 
$$s, t: C_n \rightrightarrows F_{n-1}(\mathcal{C})_{n-1}$$ 
where $F_{n-1}: (n-1)Comp \to (n-1)Cat$ is the "free $(n-1)$-category on an $(n-1)$-computad", and $D_j$ denotes the set of $j$-cells in a higher-dimensional category $D$. 

1. The data must satisfy [[globe|globularity]] conditions: for all $c \in C_n$, the $(n-1)$-cells $s(c)$ and $t(c)$ must share the same source and the same target (as elements in $F_{n-1}(\mathcal{C})_{n-2}$). 

To complete the induction, we need to define $F_n$. Roughly speaking, in dimensions $j \lt n$, the structure agrees with that of $F_{n-1}(\mathcal{C})$. In dimension $n$, the $n$-cells are formal pasting diagrams built from the elements of $C_n$ by formal [[whiskering]]s and formal [[composition]]s across $(n-1)$-cells in $F_{n-1}(\mathcal{C})$. 

(Much detail to be filled in...) 


# Examples #

* As in the definition, a 0-computad is a set.

* The free [[0-category]] on a 0-computad is just itself.

* A 1-computad is just a [[directed graph]].

* The free 1-category on a 1-computad is the usual free category on a graph.  That is, its objects are the vertices of the graph and its morphisms are finite composable strings of edges in the graph.

* A 2-computad is given by a directed graph together with a set $C_2$ of 2-cells, each equipped with a source and a target which are composable strings of edges in the graph.  For example, if the directed graph is a square
  $$\array{\bullet & \overset{f}{\to} & \bullet \\
  ^h\downarrow && \downarrow^k\\
  \bullet& \underset{g}{\to} & \bullet}$$
  then the free category it generates is the free noncommutative square, having two diagonals $k f$ and $g h$.  We can then make a 2-computad by adding one 2-cell $\alpha$ with source $k f$ and target $g h$.  The free 2-category on this 2-computad can then be drawn pictorially as
  $$\array{\bullet & \overset{f}{\to} & \bullet\\
  ^h\downarrow & \swarrow_\alpha & \downarrow^k\\
  \bullet & \underset{g}{\to} & \bullet}$$

* Any $n$-[[globular set]] can be considered as an $n$-computad where for each $n$, the functions $s, t: C_n \rightrightarrows F_{n-1}(\mathcal{C})_{n-1}$ land inside $C_{n-1}$.  The free $n$-category on this $n$-computad will then agree with the free $n$-category on the $n$-globular set we started with.

* Every [[oriental]] can be presented by a computad.


# Computads, presheaves and opetopes #

The category of computads is "almost" a [[presheaf]] category.  At first glance, it may look as though it should *be* a presheaf category, say $Set^{Ctp^{op}}$ where $Ctp$ is the category of "computopes."  A "computope" is, intuitively, one possible "[[geometric shapes for higher structures|shape]]" for an $n$-cell in an $n$-category.  For example, every "[[globe]]" is a computope, as is every [[simplex]]/[[oriental]], every [[cube]], and so on.  It may feel at first as though a computad should be specified by giving a set of cells of each "shape" (i.e. for each computope) related by "face maps," generalizing [[globular set]]s, [[simplicial set]]s, [[cubical set]]s, and so on.

However, the presence of identities in the notion of free $n$-category prevents this from quite working, for sort of the same reason that [[strict n-categories]] are insufficient for $n\gt 2$.  For instance, there is a 2-computad with one 0-cell $x$, *no* 1-cells, and two 2-cells $\alpha$ and $\beta$.  The source and target of $\alpha$ and $\beta$ must then both be the identity 1-cell $id_x$ of $x$.  Now in the free 2-category generated by this 2-computad, we have $\beta\alpha = \alpha\beta$, by the [[Eckmann-Hilton argument]].  If we define a 3-computad on top of this 2-computad with a 3-cell $\mu$ whose source (say) is $\beta\alpha = \alpha\beta$, then there can be no "face" maps from the computope-shape of $\mu$ to the computope-shape of $\beta$ and $\alpha$, since there is no way to distinguish $\alpha$ from $\beta$ (i.e. neither one is the "first" or the "second").

This argument only kicks in for $n\ge 3$, so the categories of 0-computads, 1-computads, and 2-computads are presheaf categories.  (For 0 and 1, this is obvious.)

If we restrict the notion slightly, however, we can obtain presheaf categories.  For instance, if we consider only "many-to-one" computads in which the target of each $n$-cell consists of exactly one $(n-1)$-cell (rather than a free composite of such), we obtain a presheaf category, which is in fact equivalent to the category of [[opetopic set]]s.

+--{: .query}
[[Mike Shulman]]: Do the non-strict versions of computads get around this problem?

Daniel Sch&#228;ppi: Batanin has a paper on this:
[Computads and slices of operads](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.CA/0209035)

If you take any finitary monad $A$ on the category of globular sets, you can use the truncation functor to get monads $A_n$ on the category of $n$-globular sets, and then you can inductively define the notion of an $A$-computad. If you take $A=T$ the free strict $\omega$-category monad, then this notion agrees with Streets definition of an ordinary computad. Batanin gives a condition which ensures that the category of $n$-computads of $A$ is a presheaf category, in terms of slices of the monad $A$.

The $k$-slice of $A$ is defined as follows: the full subcategory of $A_n-\mathbf{Alg}$ consisting of those algebras whose underlying globular set is $(n-1)$-terminal is monadic over the category of sets, and the $k$-slice of $A$ is given by this monad. In the above paper, Theorem 5.2 Batanin shows that the category of $n$-computads of a Batanin-operad $A$ is a presheaf category if the $k$-slices of $A$ are strongly regular theories for $0\leq k \leq n-1$. This applies in particular to the case where $A$ is the operad for Batanin weak $\omega$-categories.
=--

# Computads as cofibrant resolutions #

With respect to the [[folk model structure]] on [[strict omega-category|strict ∞-categories]]

* Yves Lafont, Francois M&#233;tayer, Krzysztof Worytkiewicz, _A folk model structure on omega-cat_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/0712.0617))

the $\omega$-categories that are (freely generated by) computads are precisely the cofibrant objects

This is discussed in 

* F. M&#233;tayer, _Cofibrant complexes are free_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.CT/0701746))

* F. M&#233;tayer, _Resolutions by polygraphs_ ([tac](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/11/7/11-07.pdf))

This says in particular that _every_ [[strict ∞-category]] is equivalent as an $\omega$-category to one that is a computad. (Notice that these articles say "polygraph" for "computad", following Burroni).

The cofibrant resolution $(-)_{cof} \to Id : \omega Cat \to \omega Cat$ given by M&#233;tayer in these articles is the one counit of the [[adjunction]] $\omega Comp  \to \omega Cat$. 


> We had some blog discussion about this at [Freely generated omega-categories](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2008/10/freely_generated_categories.html).
