pages/4/3/9/6/6934/content.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Overview

A [[dependent type|dependently typed]] [[functional programming language]] with applications to [[certified programming]]. It is also  used as a [[proof assistant]]. 

Besides [[Coq]], Agda is one of the languages in which [[homotopy type theory]] has been implemented ([Brunerie](#Brunerie)).
Agda can be compiled to Haskell, Epic or Javascript.

## Related concepts

[[!include proof assistants and formalization projects -- list]]

## References
 {#References}

General information on Agda is at

* [Agda Wiki](http://wiki.portal.chalmers.se/agda/pmwiki.php)

* _['Hello World!' in Adga](http://progopedia.com/example/hello-world/251/)_

* _[learn-you-an-agda (and achieve enlightment)](https://github.com/liamoc/learn-you-an-agda)_

* [[Ulf Norell]], James Chapman, _Dependently Typed Programming in Agda_ ([pdf](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/~ulfn/darcs/AFP08/LectureNotes/AgdaIntro.pdf))

* [[Dan Licata]], Ian Voysey, _[Programming and proving in Agda](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~drl/teaching/oplss13/)_

* [[Ulf Norell]], _Towards a practical programming
language based on dependent type theory_, 2007 ([pdf](https://synrc.com/publications/cat/Functional%20Languages/Agda/PracticalDependent.pdf))

A tutorial for use of Agda as an implementation of [[homotopy type theory]] is at

* {#Brunerie} [[Guillaume Brunerie]], _Agda for homotopy type theory_ ([web](https://github.com/guillaumebrunerie/HoTT/tree/master/Agda/tutorial))
 
* [[Guillaume Brunerie]], _The Agda proof assistant_, slides,  [pdf](http://web.archive.org/web/20160101212359/http://uf-ias-2012.wikispaces.com/file/view/agda.pdf/390147250/agda.pdf)

and specifically of [[Cubical Agda]] as an implementation of [[cubical type theory]]:

* {#VMA19} [[homotopytypetheory:Andrea Vezzosi]], [[Anders Mörtberg]] and Andreas Abel, _Cubical Agda: A Dependently Typed Programming Language with Univalence and Higher Inductive Types_, 2019 ([pdf](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~amoertbe/papers/cubicalagda.pdf))



The HoTT-Agda library is at

* github, _[hott-agda](https://github.com/hott/hott-agda/)_

category: software

[[!redirects agda]]

[[!redirects Cubical Agda]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 161312 Update date: 2021-03-15 23:49:53+00:00 Page name: Agda

pages/4/3/9/6/6934/content.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Overview

A [[dependent type|dependently typed]] [[functional programming language]] with applications to [[certified programming]]. It is also  used as a [[proof assistant]]. 

Besides [[Coq]], Agda is one of the languages in which [[homotopy type theory]] has been implemented ([Brunerie](#Brunerie)).
Agda can be compiled to Haskell, Epic or Javascript.

## Cubical Agda

Cubical Agda is a version of Agda (turned on by the flag `--cubical`) that implements a type theory similar to CCHM (De Morgan) [[cubical type theory]].

Its main difference from CCHM is that instead of an exotype of "cofibrant propositions" it uses the interval itself, replacing cofibrant propositions by statements of the form $r \equiv 1$ for some dimension expression $r$.  This change does not prevent the construction of a model for the theory in De Morgan [[cubical sets]], although it doesn't technically fall under the Orton-Pitts axioms since $I$ is not a subobject of $\Omega$, and no one has checked whether this model can be strengthened to a [[Quillen model category]].

More problematically, to support [[identity types]] a la Swan (which are distinct from both cubical "path types" and Martin-Lof "jdentity types") the type of cofibrant propositions must support a [[dominance]].  Cubical Agda thus assumes that $I$ supports a dominance, but this is not true in De Morgan cubical sets.  So the semantics of the entirety of Cubical Agda, with Swan identity types, is unclear.  (However, ordinary Martin-Lof jdentity types can also be defined in Cubical Agda as an indexed inductive family, with computational behavior as usual for any inductive types in cubical type theory.)

## Related concepts

[[!include proof assistants and formalization projects -- list]]

## References
 {#References}

General information on Agda is at

* [Agda Wiki](http://wiki.portal.chalmers.se/agda/pmwiki.php)

* _['Hello World!' in Adga](http://progopedia.com/example/hello-world/251/)_

* _[learn-you-an-agda (and achieve enlightment)](https://github.com/liamoc/learn-you-an-agda)_

* [[Ulf Norell]], James Chapman, _Dependently Typed Programming in Agda_ ([pdf](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/~ulfn/darcs/AFP08/LectureNotes/AgdaIntro.pdf))

* [[Dan Licata]], Ian Voysey, _[Programming and proving in Agda](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~drl/teaching/oplss13/)_

* [[Ulf Norell]], _Towards a practical programming
language based on dependent type theory_, 2007 ([pdf](https://synrc.com/publications/cat/Functional%20Languages/Agda/PracticalDependent.pdf))

A tutorial for use of Agda as an implementation of [[homotopy type theory]] is at

* {#Brunerie} [[Guillaume Brunerie]], _Agda for homotopy type theory_ ([web](https://github.com/guillaumebrunerie/HoTT/tree/master/Agda/tutorial))
 
* [[Guillaume Brunerie]], _The Agda proof assistant_, slides,  [pdf](http://web.archive.org/web/20160101212359/http://uf-ias-2012.wikispaces.com/file/view/agda.pdf/390147250/agda.pdf)

and specifically of [[Cubical Agda]] as an implementation of [[cubical type theory]]:

* {#VMA19} [[homotopytypetheory:Andrea Vezzosi]], [[Anders Mörtberg]] and Andreas Abel, _Cubical Agda: A Dependently Typed Programming Language with Univalence and Higher Inductive Types_, 2019 ([pdf](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~amoertbe/papers/cubicalagda.pdf))



The HoTT-Agda library is at

* github, _[hott-agda](https://github.com/hott/hott-agda/)_

category: software

[[!redirects agda]]

[[!redirects Cubical Agda]]
