
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

\tableofcontents

## Idea

The concept of a [[special linear group]] $SL(2,K)$ with $K = \mathbb{O}$ the [[octonions]] does not literally make sense, due to the failure of the [[octonions]] to be an [[associative algebra]]. 

Nevertheless, the pattern of the [[special linear groups]] of the other three [[real numbers|real]] [[normed division algebras]] suggests that for some suitably adjusted concept of "special linear group", it should make sense to speak of $SL(2,\mathbb{O})$, after all, and that it should essentially be the [[spin group]] $Spin(9,1)$:

[[!include exceptional spinors and division algebras -- table]]


## Realizations

### By Manogue, Schray & Dray
 {#RealizationByManogueSchrayDray}

[Manogue & Schray 1993](#MS93) have shown how to interpret $Spin(9,1)$ as $SL(2,\mathbb{O})$ as follows.  A clear summary of these results is given by [Dray & Manogue 2010, p. 4](#DM10), which we follow now.

First, a warmup with the [[complex numbers]]. The space $\mathfrak{h}_2(\mathbb{C})$ of $2 \times 2$ [[hermitian matrices]] with entries in $\mathbb{C}$ may be identified with 4-dimensional [[Minkowski spacetime]], since the [[determinant]] is a [[quadratic form]] of [[signature of a quadratic form|signature]] $(1,3)$. (For details on this and the following identification see at *[[geometry of physics -- supersymmetry]]* the section *[Spacetime in dimensions 3, 4, 6 and 10](geometry+of+physics+--+supersymmetry#SpacetimeInDim3And4And6And10)*).

Any element $g \in \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{C})$ [[group action|acts]] as a [[linear transformation]] of $\mathfrak{h}_2(\mathbb{C})$ by [[conjugation action|conjugation]]: 

$$  
  X \mapsto g X g^\ast
  , \qquad 
  X \in \mathfrak{h}_2(\mathbb{C})  
$$

and this [[group action|action]] preserves the [[determinant]] on $\mathfrak{h}_2(\mathbb{C})$, so that we obtain a [[group homomorphism]] from $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{C})$ to $\mathrm{O}(1,3)$.  In fact this is a [[double cover]] from $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{C})$ onto $SO_0(1,3)$.   Since $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{C})$ is [[simply connected topological space|simply connected]], this allows us to identify $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{C})$ with $\mathrm{Spin}(1,3) \cong \mathrm{Spin}(3,1)$.  

Following this pattern, the space $\mathfrak{h}_2(\mathbb{O})$ of $2 \times 2$ [[hermitian matrices]] with entries in the [[octonions]] $\mathbb{O}$ may be identified with 10-dimensional [[Minkowski spacetime]], since the [[determinant]] is a [[quadratic form]] of [[signature of a quadratic form|signature]] $(1,9)$.   

> (To note here that the usual formula for the [[determinant]] of a $2\times 2$ matrix is indeed well-defined on  elements of $\mathfrak{h}_2(\mathbb{O})$, because any octonion commutes with its [[complex conjugation|conjugate]].)  

Let $\mathbb{M}_2(\mathbb{O})$ be the set of  those $2 \times 2$ octonionic matrices all of whose entries lie in *some* subalgebra of $\mathbb{O}$ [[isomorphism|isomorphic]] to $\mathbb{C}$. Then the determinant of $g \in \mathbb{M}_2(\mathbb{O})$ is well-defined by the usual formula, and furthermore $(g X) g^\ast = g (X g^\ast)$ for all $X \in \mathfrak{h}_2(\mathbb{O})$.   

Now *define* $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{O})$ to be the [[subgroup]] of [[linear transformations]] of $\mathbb{O}^2$ generated by those of the form 

$$
  \psi 
    \mapsto 
  g \psi 
  \,,
$$

where $g \in \mathbb{M}_2(\mathbb{O})$ has $det(g) = \pm 1$ &lbrack;[Dray & Manogue 2010 (18)](#DM10)(&rbrack;.  

This group acts by well-defined [[conjugation action]] on $\mathfrak{h}_2(\mathbb{O})$ via

$$  
  X 
    \mapsto 
  (g X) g^\ast 
  =
  g (X g^\ast)
  , \qquad 
  X \in \mathfrak{h}_2(\mathbb{O})  
  \,,
$$

and this action preserves the determinant on $\mathfrak{h}_2(\mathbb{O})$. This construction gives a [[group homomorphism]] from $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{O})$ to $\mathrm{O}(1,9)$ which turns out to be a [[double cover]]. This shows that $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{O})$ as defined above is [[isomorphism|isomorphic]] $\mathrm{Spin}(1,9) \cong \mathrm{Spin}(9,1)$.


### By Hitchin

Another proposal for making sense of $SL(2,\mathbb{O})$ is due to [Hitchin](#Hitchin18). In this approach, "$SL(2,\mathbb{O})$" is a submanifold of "$GL(2,\mathbb{O})$", which is an open orbit of $Spin(9,1) \times GL(2,\mathbb{R})$ on ${S} \otimes \mathbb{R}^2$.  Here ${S}$ is the 16-dimensional [[spin representation]] of $Spin(9,1)$; this may be identified with $\mathbb{O}^2$.


## References

* {#MS93} [[Corinne Manogue]], Jörg Schray: *Finite Lorentz transformations, automorphisms, and division algebras*,   Section 5 of: *Lorentz transformations*, J. Math. Phys. **34** (1993) 3746-3767  &lbrack;[arXiv:hep-th/9302044](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9302044), [doi:10.1063/1.530056](
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.530056)&rbrack;


* {#Baez} [[John Baez]]: *$\mathbb{O}\mathrm{P}^1$ and Lorentzian geometry*, Section 3.3 of: *The octonions*, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. **39** (2002) 145--205 &lbrack;[web](https://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/octonions/node11.html), [arXiv:math/0105155](https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0105155)&rbrack;

* {#DM10} [[Tevian Dray]], [[Corinne Manogue]], _Octonionic Cayley spinors and $\mathrm{E}_6$_, Comment. Math. Univ. Carolin. **51** (2010), 193--207 &lbrack;[arXiv:0911.2255](https://arxiv.org/abs/0911.2255), [eudml:37752](https://eudml.org/doc/37752)&rbrack;

* {#DHK14} [[Tevian Dray]], [[John Huerta]], Joshua Kincaid: _The magic square of Lie groups: the $2 \times 2$ case_, Lett. Math. Phys. **104** (2014) 1445--68. &lbrack;[arXiv:2009.00390](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.00390), [doi:10.1007/s11005-014-0720-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11005-014-0720-3)&rbrack;

* {#Hitchin18} [[Nigel Hitchin]]: *$SL(2)$ over the octonions*, Mathematical Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy. **118** 1, Royal Irish Academy, (2018) &lbrack;[arXiv:1805.02224](https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.02224), [doi:10.3318/pria.2018.118.04](https://doi.org/10.3318/pria.2018.118.04)&rbrack;



[[!redirects special linear group over the octonions]]

[[!redirects octonionic special linear group]]

[[!redirects SL2O]]
