Given an algebraicaly closed field $k$, an __algebraic $k$-variety__ is an affine, quasiaffine, projective or quasiprojective $k$-variety. Affine $k$-varieties are maximal spectra (= sets of maximal ideals) of finitely generated [[noetherian ring|noetherian]] (commutative unital) $k$-algebras without nilpotents with the [[Zariski topology]]. As topological spaces they are [[noetherian space|noetherian]]. Projective $k$-varieties are obtained in a similar way from graded $k$-algebras. Quasiaffine $k$-varieties are Zariski-open subspaces of affine $k$-varieties; quasiprojective are the Zariski open subspaces of projective $k$-varieties. Morphisms between varieties are so-called regular maps.

There is an equivalence of categories between the category of [[integral schemes]] of finite type over $Spec\,k$ where $k$ is an algebraically closed field and the category of $k$-varieties. Of course, the corresponding scheme and a variety have different sets of points, and the points in common are the closed points of the scheme. Remaining points are the generic points of subvarieties. Generic points were often used, without proper foundations, in other language, already in the works of the italian school of algebraic geometry in first half of 20th century. Some modern algebraic geometers by varieties mean objects of certain slightly bigger categories of relative $S$-schemes (where $S$ is not necessarily $Spec\,k$). 

An amusing discussion on the differences between schemes and varieties can be found at <em>Secret blogging seminar</em>: [algebraic geometry without prime ideals](http://sbseminar.wordpress.com/2009/08/06/algebraic-geometry-without-prime-ideals).

[[!redirects algebraic varieties]]