pages/6/6/7/1/21766/content.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Fields and quanta
+--{: .hide}
[[!include fields and quanta - table]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

In [[particle physics]] [[experiments]], there tends to be a dichotomy between _direct detection at high energy_ and _indirect detection via high precision_.

Traditionally, direct high energy experiments have been dominating the field since the discovery of [[heavy quark|heavy]] [[quarks]] in large accelerator experiments, culminating in the discovery of the [[Higgs boson]] at the [[LHC experiment]]. Here the particle being detected is an actual decay product of the [[scattering]] process.

But heavy [[fundamental particles]], whose mass may be beyond that of direct reaction products obtained in a given accelerator experiment, may still manifest themselves indirectly, as [[virtual particles]] contributing to [[loop order|loop corrections]] of the [[scattering amplitudes]] of all lighter particles to which they couple. Therefore, sufficiently _precise_ measurement of particle reaction at low energy may still reveal the presence and properties of particles at (much) higher energy.

An example for a potential effect seen in precision experiments are the [[flavour anomalies]] in [[B-meson]] decays at various experiments, including the [[LHCb experiment]], [[Belle experiment]] and [[BaBar experiment]]. 

Since, at the same time, the [[LHC experiment]] has not made any further _direct_ detection, beyond the [[Higgs boson]], it has been argued that indirect precision experiments will or should gain in importance in the future of [[particle physics]].

## References

General:

* {#Brambilla14} Brambilla et al., Section 5 of: _[[QCD and strongly coupled gauge theories - challenges and perspectives]]_, Eur Phys J C Part Fields. 2014; 74(10): 2981  ([arXiv:1404.3723](https://arxiv.org/abs/1404.3723), [doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-014-2981-5](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1140%2Fepjc%2Fs10052-014-2981-5))

With focus on [[Higgs field]]-interactions:

* Gudrun Heinrich, *Collider Physics at the Precision Frontier*, Physics Reports, Volume 922, 2021, Pages 1-69 ([arXiv:2009.00516](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.00516))

* Sven Heinemeyer, Stanislaw Jadach, Jürgen Reuter, *Theory requirements for SM Higgs and EW precision physics at the FCC-ee* ([arXiv:2106.11802](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.11802))

In view of potential [[leptoquarks]]:

* I. Doršner, S. Fajfer, A. Greljo, J. F. Kamenik, N. Košnik, _Physics of leptoquarks in precision experiments and at particle colliders_, Physics Reports Volume 641, 17 June 2016, Pages 1-68 ([arXiv:1603.04993](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.04993))

In view of [[flavour anomalies]]:

* {#AHRS20} Rafael Aoude, Tobias Hurth, Sophie Renner, William Shepherd, _The impact of flavour data on global fits of the MFV SMEFT_ ([arXiv:2003.05432](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.05432))








[[!redirects precision experiments]]

[[!redirects precision measurement]]
[[!redirects precision measurements]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 165725 Update date: 2021-06-23 08:26:28+00:00 Page name: precision experiment

pages/6/6/7/1/21766/content.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Fields and quanta
+--{: .hide}
[[!include fields and quanta - table]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

In [[particle physics]] [[experiments]], there tends to be a dichotomy between _direct detection at high energy_ and _indirect detection via high precision_.

Traditionally, direct high energy experiments have been dominating the field since the discovery of [[heavy quark|heavy]] [[quarks]] in large accelerator experiments, culminating in the discovery of the [[Higgs boson]] at the [[LHC experiment]]. Here the particle being detected is an actual decay product of the [[scattering]] process.

But heavy [[fundamental particles]], whose mass may be beyond that of direct reaction products obtained in a given accelerator experiment, may still manifest themselves indirectly, as [[virtual particles]] contributing to [[loop order|loop corrections]] of the [[scattering amplitudes]] of all lighter particles to which they couple. Therefore, sufficiently _precise_ measurement of particle reaction at low energy may still reveal the presence and properties of particles at (much) higher energy.

{#IntensityFrontier} Discerning the small statistical effects expected in precision experiments requires access to a large amount of experimental data, hence to a high *intensity* of particle scattering processes, whence the community refers to precision experiments as probing "the intensity frontier" of particle physics. This is in contrast to direct detection experiment which can do with less data as long as it concerns high energy scattering processes, whence direct detection experiments are said to be probing "the energy frontier" of particle physics.

An example for a potential effect seen in precision experiments are the [[flavour anomalies]] in [[B-meson]] decays at various experiments, including the [[LHCb experiment]], [[Belle experiment]] and [[BaBar experiment]]. 

Since, at the same time, the [[LHC experiment]] has not made any further _direct_ detection, beyond the [[Higgs boson]], it has been argued that indirect precision experiments will or should gain in importance in the future of [[particle physics]].

## References

General:

* {#Brambilla14} Brambilla et al., Section 5 of: _[[QCD and strongly coupled gauge theories - challenges and perspectives]]_, Eur Phys J C Part Fields. 2014; 74(10): 2981  ([arXiv:1404.3723](https://arxiv.org/abs/1404.3723), [doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-014-2981-5](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1140%2Fepjc%2Fs10052-014-2981-5))

With focus on [[Higgs field]]-interactions:

* Gudrun Heinrich, *Collider Physics at the Precision Frontier*, Physics Reports, Volume 922, 2021, Pages 1-69 ([arXiv:2009.00516](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.00516))

* Sven Heinemeyer, Stanislaw Jadach, Jürgen Reuter, *Theory requirements for SM Higgs and EW precision physics at the FCC-ee* ([arXiv:2106.11802](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.11802))

In view of potential [[leptoquarks]]:

* I. Doršner, S. Fajfer, A. Greljo, J. F. Kamenik, N. Košnik, _Physics of leptoquarks in precision experiments and at particle colliders_, Physics Reports Volume 641, 17 June 2016, Pages 1-68 ([arXiv:1603.04993](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.04993))

In view of [[flavour anomalies]]:

* {#AHRS20} Rafael Aoude, Tobias Hurth, Sophie Renner, William Shepherd, _The impact of flavour data on global fits of the MFV SMEFT_ ([arXiv:2003.05432](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.05432))








[[!redirects precision experiments]]

[[!redirects precision measurement]]
[[!redirects precision measurements]]
