pages/3/7/4/2/22473/content.md, before:



* [webpage](https://www.is.mpg.de/~bs)

* [Wikipedia entry](https://www.is.mpg.de/~bs)


## Selected writings

On [[Bochner's theorem]] generalized to [[non-abelian groups]] in the context of [[kernel methods]]:

* [[Kenji Fukumizu]], [[Bharath Sriperumbudur]], [[Arthur Gretton]], [[Bernhard Schölkopf]], *Characteristic Kernels on Groups and Semigroups*, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 21 : 22nd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2008 ([NIPS 2008](https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2008/)), 473-480 ([mpg:5466](http://www.is.mpg.de/publications/5466), [pdf](http://www.gatsby.ucl.ac.uk/~gretton/papers/FukSriGreSch09.pdf))

On some philosophical aspects of [[statistical learning theory]]:

* [[David Corfield]], [[Bernhard Schölkopf]], Vladimir Vapnik, _Falsificationism and statistical learning theory: Comparing the Popper and Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimensions_, 2009, Journal for General Philosophy of Science 40 (1), 51-58 ([doi:10.1007/s10838-009-9091-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10838-009-9091-3))


category: people

Commit message:

Revision ID: 163758 Update date: 2021-05-09 09:38:52+00:00 Page name: Bernhard Schölkopf

pages/3/7/4/2/22473/content.md, after:



* [webpage](https://www.is.mpg.de/~bs)

* [Wikipedia entry](https://www.is.mpg.de/~bs)


## Selected writings

On [[kernel methods]] in [[machine learning]]:

* Thomas Hofmann, [[Bernhard Schölkopf]], Alexander J. Smola, *Kernel methods in machine learning*, Annals of Statistics 2008, Vol. 36, No. 3, 1171-1220 ([arXiv:math/0701907](https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0701907))



On [[Bochner's theorem]] generalized to [[non-abelian groups]] in the context of [[kernel methods]]:

* [[Kenji Fukumizu]], [[Bharath Sriperumbudur]], [[Arthur Gretton]], [[Bernhard Schölkopf]], *Characteristic Kernels on Groups and Semigroups*, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 21 : 22nd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2008 ([NIPS 2008](https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2008/)), 473-480 ([mpg:5466](http://www.is.mpg.de/publications/5466), [pdf](http://www.gatsby.ucl.ac.uk/~gretton/papers/FukSriGreSch09.pdf))

On some philosophical aspects of [[statistical learning theory]]:

* [[David Corfield]], [[Bernhard Schölkopf]], Vladimir Vapnik, _Falsificationism and statistical learning theory: Comparing the Popper and Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimensions_, 2009, Journal for General Philosophy of Science 40 (1), 51-58 ([doi:10.1007/s10838-009-9091-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10838-009-9091-3))


category: people
