# Cauchy spaces
* tic
{: toc}


## Idea ##

A Cauchy space is a generalisation of a [[metric space]] with a bare minimum of structure for the concepts of Cauchy sequence, Cauchy-continuous map, and Cauchy completion to make sense.  Topologically (that is, up to continuous maps), any Cauchy space is a [[convergence space]], but not much more than that.


## Definitions ##

A __Cauchy space__ is a set $S$ together with a collection of proper [[filters]] declared to be __Cauchy filters__.  These must satisfy axioms:

1. Centred: The principal ultrafilter $F_x = \{ A \;|\; x \in A \}$ at $x$ is Cauchy;
1. Isotone: If $F \subseteq G$ and $F$ is Cauchy, then $G$ is Cauchy;
1. Filtered: If $F$ and $G$ are Cauchy and $F \vee G$ (the filter generated by $F \cup G$) is proper, then $F \cap G$ is Cauchy.

That is, the set of Cauchy filters is a filter of proper filters that contains all principal ultrafilters (sort of a tongue twister).

Notice that by this definition, there are two Cauchy structures on the [[empty set]] (or rather, one for each [[truth value]]), depending on whether the improper filter is Cauchy; on an [[inhabited set]], the improper filter must be Cauchy.  Often one sees a definition where Cauchy filters are required to be proper instead.


The definition can also be phrased in terms of [[nets]]; a __Cauchy net__ is a net whose eventuality filter is Cauchy.  In particular, a __[[Cauchy sequence]]__ is a [[sequence]] whose eventuality filter is Cauchy.


The morphisms of Cauchy spaces are the Cauchy-continuous functions; a function $f$ between Cauchy spaces is __Cauchy-continuous__ if $f(F)$ is a (base of a) Cauchy filter whenever $F$ is.  In this way, Cauchy spaces form a category $Cau$.


## Examples ##

Any [[metric space]] is a Cauchy space: $F$ is a Cauchy filter if it has elements of arbitrarily small diameter.  This reconstructs the usual definitions of Cauchy sequence and Cauchy-continuous map for metric spaces.  (In particular, a map between metric spaces is Cauchy-continuous if it maps every Cauchy sequence to a Cauchy sequence; the result for general nets follows since a metric space is [[sequential space|sequential]].)  The [[forgetful functor]] from $Met$ (metric spaces and short maps) to $Cau$ is [[faithful functor|faithful]] but not [[full functor|full]].


More generally, any [[uniform space]] is a Cauchy space: $F$ is a Cauchy filter if, given any entourage $U$, $A \times A \subseteq U$ for some $A \in F$.  This reconstructs the usual definitions of Cauchy net and Cauchy-continuous map for uniform spaces.  (In general, we need nets rather than just sequences here.)  The [[forgetful functor]] from $Unif$ (uniform spaces and uniformly continuous maps) to $Cau$ is [[faithful functor|faithful]] but still not [[full functor|full]].


## Properties ##

Every Cauchy space is a [[convergence space]]; $F \to x$ if the intersection of $F$ with the principal ultrafilter $F_x$ is Cauchy.  Note that any convergent filter must be Cauchy.  Conversely, if every Cauchy filter is convergent, then the Cauchy space is called __complete__.


The set of proper Cauchy filters on a Cauchy space has a natural Cauchy structure which is complete and (as a convergence space) [[Hausdorff space|Hausdorff]]; this is the (Hausdorff) __completion__ of the original Cauchy space.  The complete Cauchy spaces thus form a [[reflective subcategory]] of $Cau$.  This completion agrees with the completion of a metric or uniform space; that is, Cauchy completion, even of a metric space, is an operation on its Cauchy structure only.


A Cauchy space $S$ is __precompact__ (or __totally bounded__) if every filter is contained in a Cauchy filter.  Equivalently (assuming the [[ultrafilter theorem]], a weak form of the [[axiom of choice]]), $S$ is precompact iff every ultrafilter is Cauchy.  A Cauchy space is [[compact space|compact]] (as a convergence space) if and only if it is both complete and precompact.  Conversely, it is precompact iff its completion is compact.


## References ##

Eva Lowen-Colebunders (1989). Function Classes of Cauchy Continuous Maps. Dekker, New York, 1989.


[[!redirects Cauchy spaces]]
[[!redirects Cauchy filter]]
[[!redirects Cauchy continuous map]]
[[!redirects Cauchy continuous function]]
[[!redirects Cauchy-continuous map]]
[[!redirects Cauchy-continuous function]]
[[!redirects Cauchy filters]]
[[!redirects Cauchy continuous maps]]
[[!redirects Cauchy continuous functions]]
[[!redirects Cauchy-continuous maps]]
[[!redirects Cauchy-continuous functions]]