## Definition

A __Gabriel filter__ $G$ is a [[uniform filter]] of left ideals in a [[ring]] $R$ which is [[idempotent]] under [[Gabriel composition of filters]]. 

## Terminology

In our definition this notion is equivalent to [[topologizing filter]]; though for some authors the latter notion slightly differs. Stenstroem 
says __Gabriel topology__ instead of Gabriel filter, because all Gabriel filters form a basis of neighborhoods of $0$ for a topology on $R$; on the other hand the Gabriel filter itself is an additive analogue of Grothendieck topology, see also [[enriched sheaf]].

## Properties

If $L$ and $L'$ are left ideals in a Gabriel filter $F$, then the set $L L'$ (of all products $l l'$ where $l\in L, l'\in L'$) is an element on $F$. Any uniform filter $F$ is contained in a minimal Gabriel filter $G$ (said to be *generated by $F$*), namely the intersection of all Gabriel filters containing $F$. Given a Gabriel filter $G$, the class of all $G$-[[torsion]] modules (see [[uniform filter]]) is a hereditary torsion class. 

## Literature

* [[Pierre Gabriel]], _[[Des catégories abéliennes]]_
* [[Bo Stenstroem]], _Rings of quotients_, Springer 1975.
* [[Zoran Škoda]], _Noncommutative localization in noncommutative geometry_, London Math. Society Lecture Note Series __330__, ed. A. Ranicki; pp. 220&#8211;313, [math.QA/0403276](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.QA/0403276).
* [[Wendy Lowen]], _A generalization of the Gabriel–Popescu theorem_, J. Pure Appl. Alg. __190__:1–3 (2004) 197-211 [doi](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpaa.2003.11.016)

A version for [[quantale]]s:

* [[Kimmo Rosenthal|Kimmo I. Rosenthal]], _A general approach to Gabriel filters on quantales_, Comm. Algebra __20__, n.11 (1992) 3393--3409 [doi](https://doi.org/10.1080/00927879208824522)

[[!redirects Gabriel topology]]
[[!redirects Gabriel filters]]
