[[!include contents]]

Welcome!

This is a lab for collaborative work on _Mathematics_, _Physics_ and _Philosophy_ — especially insofar as these subjects touch on $n$-categories and related 'higher algebraic structures'.  

In other words: this place is like the library, or alchemist's laboratory, in the back room of the
<a href="http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/"><em>n</em>-Category Caf&eacute;</a>. You come here to work and go there to chat.

We are hoping to create here a space for presentation and archival storage of collaborative work of encyclopedic, didactic, expositional,  but also original nature.  This will include, but not be limited to, the subjects being discussed every day in the $n$-Caf&eacute;.

But this site started operation only a few months ago. Some structure is beginning to appear, but we are still in a very early stage. Your help is appreciated! 

* See [[About]] for some ideas what the $n$Lab is trying to be, and what not.

* See the [[HowTo]]-page to get started if you want to contribute.

* See [[Content]] for a list of existing content. 

* See [[latest changes]] to get an idea of recent activity and to log your own changes to the $n$Lab.

* There is a <a href="http://www.math.ntnu.no/~stacey/Vanilla/nForum">forum</a> (imaginatively called the $n$-Forum) where discussion _about_ the $n$-Lab can take place (i.e. not discussion of what goes _into_ a page but rather how it goes _onto_ the page).  Some discussion has taken place (and is still taking place) on an <a href="http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/01/nlab_general_discussion.html">entry</a> at the $n$-Caf&eacute;.  Old discussions can be found at the [[General Discussion]] page.

* Distilled wisdom from the various discussions is starting to appear on the [[FAQ]].

category: meta
