__Runge-Kutta approximation schemes__ are a family of difference schemes used for iterative numerical solution of [[ordinary differential equation]]s. 

### Standard Runge-Kutta methods

In engineering it is rather standard to use the 4th order Runge-Kutta difference schemes. General overview is at 

* wikipedia [Runge-Kutta methods](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Runge%E2%80%93Kutta_methods)
* J.C. Butcher, _Coefficients for the study of Runge-Kutta integration processes_, J. Austral. Math. Soc. __3__ (1963), 185-201
* H. Munthe-Kaas, _High order Runge–Kutta methods on manifolds_, Appl. Num. Math., 29, 115-127 (1999)


### For stochastic ODE-s:

* wikipedia [Runge&#8211;Kutta method (SDE)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Runge%E2%80%93Kutta_method_%28SDE%29)

### Relation to algebraic problems and renormalization

* Ch. Brouder, _Runge-Kutta methods and renormalization_,
Europ. Phys. J. C12 (2000) 512&#8211;534.

### Lie-theoretic methods

* P. E. Crouch, R. Grossman, _Numerical integration of ordinary differential equations on manifolds_, J. Nonlinear Sci. __3__: 1-33 (1993) [doi](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02429858)

### Connections to symplectic geometry

See also [[symplectic integrator]]s.

* Alberto S. Cattaneo, Benoit Dherin, Giovanni Felder, _Formal symplectic groupoid_, Comm. Math. Phys. __253__ (2005), no. 3, 645&#8211;674 [math.SG/0312380](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0312380) [doi](HTTP://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00220-004-1199-z)

> The multiplicative structure of the trivial symplectic groupoid over $\mathbb{R}^d$ associated to the zero Poisson structure can be expressed in terms of a generating function. We address the problem of deforming such a generating function in the direction of a non-trivial Poisson structure so that the multiplication remains associative. We prove that such a deformation is unique under some reasonable conditions and we give the explicit formula for it. This formula turns out to be the semi-classical approximation of Kontsevich's deformation formula. For the case of a linear Poisson structure, the deformed generating function reduces exactly to the CBH formula of the associated Lie algebra. The methods used to prove existence are interesting in their own right as they come from an at first sight unrelated domain of mathematics: the Runge--Kutta theory of the numeric integration of ODE's. 

* Robert McLachlan, Klas Modin, Olivier Verdier, _Collective Lie--Poisson integrators on $\mathbb{R}^{3}$_, [arxiv/1307.2387](http://arxiv.org/abs/1307.2387)

> We develop Lie--Poisson integrators for general Hamiltonian systems on $\mathbb{R}^{3}$ equipped with the rigid body bracket. The method uses symplectic realisation of $\mathbb{R}^{3}$ on $T^{*}\mathbb{R}^{2}$ and application of __symplectic Runge--Kutta schemes__. As a side product, we obtain simple [[symplectic integrator]]s for general Hamiltonian systems on the sphere $S^{2}$.

* J. M. Sanz-Serra, Runge-Kutta Schemes for Hamiltonian Systems, Bit __28__, pp. 877-883, (1988).

[[!redirects Runge-Kutta approximation scheme]]

