
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Integration theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include integration theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

An _iterated integral_ is a expression involving nested [[integrals]], such as
$$ \int_{x=a}^b \bigg(\int_{y=g(x)}^{h(x)} f(x,y) \,\mathrm{d}y\bigg) \,\mathrm{d}x ,$$
where the grouping parentheses are usually left out.  Iterated integrals are the subject of [[Fubini theorem]]s.

Iterated integrals include nested [[integration of differential forms]] of the kind as it appears in the formulation of [[parallel transport]] for nonabelian-value [[connection on a bundle|connection]] form (known as the _[[Dyson formula]]_ in [[physics]]).

Applied to higher degree forms iterated integrals serve to express generalized [[transgression]] of differential forms to [[loop spaces]] and other [[mapping spaces]] relaized as [[diffeological spaces]].

## Related concepts

* [[Dyson formula]]

* [[Chen connection]]

* [[higher holonomy]]

* [ordinary homology -- description in terms of higher linear algebra](ordinary%20homology#InTermsOfHigherLinearAlgebra)


## References

The notion of iterated integration of differential forms originates in informal observation like the [[Dyson formula]] for [[parallel transport]]. It was formalized in the context of [[differential geometry]] on [[diffeological spaces]] ([[Chen spaces]]) (especially [[loop spaces]]) in 

* [[Kuo Tsai Chen]], _Iterated integrals of differential forms and loop space homology_, Ann. Math. 97 (1973), 217–246. [JSTOR](http://www.jstor.org/stable/1970846)

* [[Kuo Tsai Chen]], Iterated integrals, fundamental groups and covering spaces, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 206 (1975), 83–98. [doi:10.1090/S0002-9947-1975-0377960-0](http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/S0002-9947-1975-0377960-0)

* [[Kuo Tsai Chen]], _Iterated path integrals_. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 83(5):831-879, 1977 [doi:10.1090/S0002-9904-1977-14320-6](http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/S0002-9904-1977-14320-6)



Essentially these formulas are used in 

* [[Kiyoshi Igusa]], _Iterated integrals of superconnections_ ([arXiv:0912.0249](arxiv.org/abs/0912.0249))

for expressing [[higher holonomy]] of certain [[flat infinity-connections]] given by [[Lie infinity-algebroid representation|infinity-representations]] of [[tangent Lie algebroids]].

A review of this and more discussion in the context of a higher [[Riemann-Hilbert correspondence]] is in 

* [[Jonathan Block]], Aaron Smith, _A Riemann--Hilbert correspondence for infinity local systems_ ([arXiv:0908.2843](http://arxiv.org/abs/0908.2843))

A relation to [[algebraic cycles]] is discussed in 

* [[Richard Hain]], _Iterated Integrals and Algebraic Cycles: Examples and Prospects_ ([arXiv:](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0109204))


[[!redirects iterated integral]]
[[!redirects iterated integrals]]