
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[tachyon]] mode in the [[open string|open]] [[bosonic string]] spectrum is an indication that as a [[perturbation theory]] it describes the perturbation about an _unstable_ [[vacuum]]. [[Ashoke Sen]] realized ([Sen 99](#Sen99)) that since the open string technically propagates with its endpoints on the space filling [[D25-brane]], that instability must be the instability of the D25, which wants to decay to a "true bosonic string vacuum", usually called the tachyon vacuum.

This conjecture became famous as **Sen's conjecture**. It was subsequently checked to be true by numerical means in [[open bosonic string field theory]]. Moreover, using string field theory it became possible to study that non-perturbative state in which the [[D25-brane]] is indeed gone. There were several arguments that indeed in the vicinity of this state the perturbative open string has disappeared and turned into the closed bosonic string.

A breakthrough happened in 2005, when [[Martin Schnabl]] found an analytic expression for this "tachyon vacuum" ([Schnabl 05](#Schnabl05)).

## References

* {#Sen99} [[Ashoke Sen]], _Universality of the Tachyon Potential_,  	JHEP 9912:027,1999 ([arXiv:hep-th/9911116](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9911116))
 
An analytic solution was given in 

* {#Schnabl05} [[Martin Schnabl]], _Analytic solution for tachyon condensation in open string field theory_, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.
Volume 10, Number 4 (2006), 433-501. ([arXiv:hep-th/0511286](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0511286))
 

* {#EllwoodSchnabl06} Ian Ellwood, [[Martin Schnabl]], _Proof of vanishing cohomology at the tachyon vacuum_, JHEP 0702:096,2007 ([arXiv:hep-th/0606142](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0606142))
 

For more references see at 

* _[references -- Tachyon dynamics, decaying D-branes and Sen's conjecture](string+field+theory#BosonicStringVacuumAndSenConjecture)

See also

* Wikipedia, _[Tachyon condensation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tachyon_condensation)_

