
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Geometric quantization
+--{: .hide}
[[!include geometric quantization - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Hitchin connection_ is a [[projectively flat connection]] over the [[moduli space of Riemann surfaces]] whose [[fiber]] of a [[conformal structure]] $\Sigma$ is the [[space of quantum states]] with [[geometric quantization]] assigns to the induced [[Kähler polarization]] on the [[moduli space of flat connection]] on $\Sigma$.

Hence this is a flat connection that exhibits the relative indepdence of the [[geometric quantization]] of [[Chern-Simons theory]] from the choice of [[polarization]]. It is akin to the _[[Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov connection]]_, which serves the same purpose.

A review is in ([Lauridsen 10, section 2](#Lauridsen10)).

## Related concepts

* [[Narasimhan–Seshadri theorem]]

## References

The original article is 

* [[Nigel Hitchin]], _Flat connections and geometric quantization_, : Comm. Math. Phys. Volume 131, Number 2 (1990), 347-380. ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104200841))
 {#Hitchin90}

More explicit expressions are discussed in 

* Bert van Geemen, [[Aise Johan de Jong]], _On Hitchin's Connection_ ([arXiv:alg--geom/9701007](http://arxiv.org/abs/alg--geom/9701007))

A nice review and new concise account is in 

* {#Looijenga10} [[Eduard Looijenga]], _From WZW models to Modular Functors_ ([arXiv:1009.2245](http://arxiv.org/abs/1009.2245))


Discussion for [[deformation quantization]] instead of [[geometric quantization]] is in 

* Jorgen Ellegaard Andersen, _Hitchin's connection, Toeplitz operators and symmetry invariant deformation quantization_ ([arXiv:math/0611126](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0611126))

This also reproduces the original construciton in the context of [[Chern-Simons theory]] in 

* [[Scott Axelrod]], S. Della Pietra, [[Edward Witten]], _Geometric quantization of Chern-Simons gauge theory_, Jour. Diff. Geom. 33 (1991), 787-902.  ([EUCLID](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.jdg/1214446565))
 {#AxelrodPietraWitten91}

More details (on [[metaplectic correction]]) and generalization to connections over more general manifolds are in 

* Peter Scheinost, [[Martin Schottenloher]], _Metaplectic quantization of the moduli spaces of flat and parabolic bundles_, J. reine angew. Mathematik, 466 (1996) ([web](https://eudml.org/doc/153753))
 {#ScheinostSchottenloher96}



Similar generalization away from [[moduli spaces of flat connections]] to general [[symplectic manifolds]] with [[Kähler structure]] on them is also in

* Lauridsen, _Aspects of quantum mathematics  -- Hitchin connections and the AJ conjecture_, PhD thesis Aarhus 2010 ([pdf](http://pure.au.dk/portal/files/41741925/imf_phd_2010_mrl.pdf))
 {#Lauridsen10}

[[!redirects Hitchin connections]]
