A __set theory__ is a theory of [[sets]].

__Naïve set theory__ is the basic algebra of the [[subsets]] of any
given set $U$, together with a few levels of [[power sets]], say up to
$\mathcal{P}\mathcal{P}\mathcal{P}U$ and possibly no further.  Often
students see this first for the set of [[real numbers]] as $U$
(although in fact one could start with the set of [[natural numbers]]
and go one level further for an equivalent theory).  One could also
use [[function sets]] instead of power sets as the basic set-forming
operation (especially for a [[predicative mathematics|predicative]]
theory).

Once you start thinking very much about the nature of sets in general
(rather than merely _using_ naïve set theory), it quickly becomes
clear that one must be careful about how one can and cannot form sets. 
Georg Cantor is credited with being the first to think about sets this
deeply; although he did not propose a system of general rules for
valid set-making operations, he recognised that some sets were
'inconsistent'.  Gottlob Frege\'s set theory was found (by Bertrand
Russell) to be logically trivial because he was too careless in this
regard.

There are two ways to go about doing a more careful __axiomatic set
theory__.  The more ambitious is to develop a __foundational set
theory__:  set theory as [[foundations]] for all of mathematics.  This
is what Frege proposed (although he failed through inconsistency);
Ernst Zermelo is credited with the first consistent foundational
set-theory.  A variation of Zermelo\'s system (developed by Fraenkel
and Skolem and called Zermelo--Fraenkel set theory or ZFC) is the
orthodox foundations today, although it needs to be supplemented by
[[Grothendieck universes]] (or something along those lines) to handle
modern [[category theory]].

On the nlab we distinguish between two types of foundational set
theory: __material set theory__ and __structural set theory__.  ZFC is
an example of a material set theory, while [[ETCS]] is an example of a
structural one.

In a material set theory (also called a *membership-based set
theory*), the elements of a set exist independently of that set.

+--{: .query}
[[Arnold Neumaier]]: I doubt that this statement means anything. ZF
has no notion of time, hence nothing exists there before anything
else. In a model of ZF all sets exist simultaneously, and without a
model of ZF no set exists.
Thus the notion of pre-existence might be a property of your private
model of ZF (which apparently has extra accidental structure) but it
is not one of ZF.

Thus I am at a loss to see what this distinguishing feature should
mean. 

[[Todd Trimble]]: It seems clear to me that the preceding paragraphs
are written informally, trying to convey a _feeling_ behind what is
meant (here) by "material" vs. "structural". So the objection about
the formal theory ZF seems improper --- let's give Mike some credit;
he knows very well there's no concept of time in the formal theory. 

By "pre-existing", I think he means that _given_ a bunch of objects,
you can (under pretty general conditions, made precise by ZF for
instance) collect them into a set. He actually said that, I just
noticed. But structural set theories work a bit differently. 

[[Mike Shulman]]: Nothing that is said here has a *precise* meaning. 
We don't have *definitions* of "material set theory" or "structural
set theory"---we don't even have a definition of "set theory"!  These
paragraphs are meant only to give an intuitive understanding. 
Evidently they fail to give you such an understanding, but that
doesn't make them meaningless, since they succeed for some of us.

And no, of course I didn't mean to imply that there is a notion of
"time" in ZF.  Nor do I have a "private model" of ZF (now there's a
meaningless notion if I ever saw one), so I have removed your
subsequent comment referring to it.

Although it occurs to me now that there actually is something kind of
"time-like" in ZF, namely the ordinals that index the cumulative
hierarchy.  One way to state the [[axiom of foundation]] is that all
sets can be built up "in sequence" starting from the empty set.  Of
course there is a circularity here since the "sequence" is transfinite
and the extent of ordinals depends on the extent of sets, but the idea
is there.  However, this is definitely *not* what I meant to imply,
since material set theories can be ill-founded just as well as
well-founded, and an ill-founded set such as $x= \{x\}$ really can't
be thought of in any sense as "constructed from pre-existing
elements."  So I've removed that phrase.
=--

Frequently in material set theory one takes everything to be a [[pure
set]], including the elements of sets themselves.   Therefore, any two
sets may be meaningfully compared to ask if they are [[equal]] or if
one is a member of the other.  As a slight variation (still material
set theory), one may also accept ur-elements (or atoms) as elements. 
The main distinguishing feature of a material set theory is a global
membership predicate, whereby it is meaningful to ask, given any
object and a set, whether the object is an element of the set.

+--{: .query}
[[Arnold Neumaier]]: Here is a second attempt to define the
distinguishing feature. is that supposed to be an equivalent form of
the previous one, or a different one? 
What if only one of the features are present? 

[[Todd Trimble]]: If I may presume to speak again before Mike, I
gather that he is elaborating on what the sorts of (informal)
collecting-into-sets operations typical for the spirit of material set
theory would entail for the basic _shape_ or form that the axiomatic
theories actually take. In other words, to axiomatize those sorts of
operations, one needs to posit a global membership relation/predicate
-- at least that's the case for all such known theories. 

_Toby_:  I like the latter 'distinguishing feature', so much that I\'m
surprised that I didn\'t write it myself!  All that stuff about time
is just a metaphor.

[[Mike Shulman]]: Sorry about using the phrase "distinguishing
feature" twice; I guess I didn't proofread carefully enough.  The
problem is that none of these is really completely satisfactory; I
don't think a material set theory really needs *a priori* to have a
*global* membership predicate in the sense of applying to all
conceievable things, although most well-known material set theories do
so.  I'm still mulling over whether there is a better way to define
these ideas.  If anyone else has a way to phrase them better, be my
guest.
=--

A structural set theory, on the other hand, looks more like [[type
theory]].  Here, the elements of a set have no existence or structure
apart from their identity as elements of that set.  In particular,
they are not themselves sets, and cannot be elements of any other set.
Thus, elements of different sets cannot be compared (by default).  Among category theorists,
it\'s popular to state the axioms of a structural set theory by
specifying elementary properties of [[Set|the category of sets]]; the
orthodoxy here (to the extent that there is one) is probably Bill
Lawvere\'s [[ETCS]].  It is weaker than ZFC and must be supplemented
to handle some esoteric parts of modern mathematics, although it
suffices for most everyday uses.  Another structural set theory, which
is stronger than ETCS and less closely tied to category theory, is
[[SEAR]].

As remarked above, both material set theory and structural set theory
are **foundational set theories**.  
+--{: .query}
[[Arnold Neumaier]]: ''As remarked above'' suggests that pure set
theory is synonymous with material set theory.
May I conclude that the pure set theory constructed 
elsewhere in the n-Lab within ETCS is a material set 
theory? Thus a structural set theory has material aspects? 

_Toby_:  I wouldn\'t conclude anything like that from comparing
different articles in the Lab.  They\'re written by different people,
usually without consultation.  Not that there\'s anything wrong with
your question!  But my answer is simply that the word here should be
'material' rather than 'pure'.  (However, I would also agree that both
material and structural foundations have aspects of each other in
them, in the sense that the basic concepts of each can be formalised
in the other.)

[[Mike Shulman]]: "As remarked above" was intended to refer to the
statement "On the nlab we distinguish between two types of
foundational set theory: material set theory and structural set
theory," which makes no reference to pure sets.
=--
It is also possible to make a **definitional set theory**, in which
one defines sets in terms of some more primitive concept.  Lawvere
also proposed a foundation based on [[Cat|the category of
categories]]; then a set may be defined as a [[discrete category]]. 
In [[constructive mathematics]], a foundation based on [[type theory]]
is popular, with types interpreted as _[[tobybartels:preset|presets]]_
(sets without [[equality]]); then a set may be defined as a preset
equipped with an [[equivalence relation]] (the term [[setoid]] is also
used for such a gadget).  In [[computer science]], a foundation based
on the [[lambda-calculus]] is sometimes seen; in these terms, the
concept of _[[list]]_ is more natural than set, with the difference
being that sets have a coarser notion of equality.

Category theory can provide a common [[model theory]] to compare all
of these notions.  Although only structural set theories like ETCS
treat the elementary properties of the category $Set$ of sets as
fundamental, one can ask for any set theory what properties $Set$
satisfies and compare them in those terms.  At the very least, $Set$
should be a [[pretopos]].


# Remarks #

* There is also [[algebraic set theory]], in which a material set
theory (such as ZFC) is interpreted in the [[internal logic]] of some
[[ambient category]], often called a "category of classes".


[[!redirects material set theory]]
[[!redirects structural set theory]]
