
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea
 {#Idea}

The [[classifying topos]] $\mathcal{S}[\mathbb{O}]$ for the [[theory of objects]] $\mathbb{O}$, or the **object classifier**, as it is also called[^termin], is  the [[presheaf topos]] $[FinSet, Set]$ on the [[opposite category]] of [[FinSet]].

What motivates the terminology, is that for any [[topos]] $E$, [[geometric morphisms]] $E \to \mathcal{S}[\mathbb{O}]$ correspond to [[objects]] of $E$.

This is because by [a standard fact](morphism+of+sites#LemmaForClassifyingToposes) [[geometric morphisms]]

$$
  E \to PSh(FinSet^{op})
$$

are equivalent to [[morphisms of sites]]

$$
  E \leftarrow FinSet^{op}
$$

hence to [[finite limit]]-preserving such [[functors]]. Since finite limits in $FinSet^{op}$ are [[finite colimits]] in [[FinSet]] and since $FinSet$ is generated under finite colimits from the singleton set $\ast$, such functors are uniquely determined by their image of $\ast$, hence by a choice of object in $E$.


[^termin]: As this is not to be confused with the notion of an [[object classifier]] in an [[(∞,1)-topos]], we prefer to call it in full the _classifying topos for the theory of objects_.

[^ultra]: For another remarkable property of this inclusion functor see at [[ultrafilter monad]].

The construction is due to [[Gavin Wraith]] and constituted an important step towards the general theorem on the existence of [[classifying topos|classifying toposes]] for geometric theories in the early development of [[topos theory]].

Similarly 

* $PSh(FinSet_\ast^{op})$ is the classifying topos for [[pointed objects]].

* write $Fin\infty Grpd$ for the [[full sub-(∞,1)-category]] on [[∞Grpd]] which is generated under [[finite (∞,1)-colimits]] from the point $\ast$ ([[Higher Algebra|HA, def. 1.4.2.8]]), then the [[(∞,1)-presheaf (∞,1)-topos]] $PSh_\infty(Fin\infty Grpd^{op})$ is the [[classifying (∞,1)-topos]] for objects;

* write $Fin\infty Grpd_\ast$ for pointed finite $\infty$-groupoids in this sense, then $PSh_\infty((Fin\infty Grpd_\ast)^{op})$ is the classifying $(\infty,1)$-topos for pointed objects. See also at _[[spectrum object]]_ _[via excisive functors](spectrum%20object#ViaExcisiveFunctors)_.


## Properties

### Generic object

The _generic_ or **universal object** $U$ is the inclusion $FinSet\hookrightarrow Set$: every object $X$ of $E$ arises from some geometric morphism $f$ as $X\cong f^\ast(U)$.[^ultra]

### The symbolic link to algebra

As the role of the object classifier bears some resemblance to the role of the [[polynomial ring]] $k[x]$ over a ground ring $k$ that 'classifies' elements of k-algebras $A$ via $A\cong Hom_k(k[x], A)$, it is traditionally denoted $\mathcal{S}[U]$, the 'adjunction' of the free (=generic) object to the base topos $\mathcal{S}$, in our case $Set$.

The analogy between topos theory and algebra is pursued further in Bunge&Funk (2006) where, in the context of [[Lawvere distribution|topos distributions]] and the '[[symmetric algebra]]' of a topos (aka the [[symmetric topos]]), $\mathcal{S}[U]$ is shown to play the role of the [[real line]] $\mathbf R$ in [[functional analysis]].

### The relative case

What concerns base toposes $\mathcal{S}$ other than $Set$, it is a theorem due to [[Andreas Blass]] ([Blass 1989](#blass)) that _$\mathcal{S}$ has an object classifier $\mathcal{S}[\mathbb{O}]$ precisely if $\mathcal{S}$ has a [[natural number object]]_.

A consequence of this, discussed in sec. B4.2 of (Johnstone 2002,I p.431), is that classifying toposes for [[geometric theories]] over $\mathcal{S}$ exist precisely if the object classifier $\mathcal{S}[\mathbb{O}]$ exists.

### An alternative characterization

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The classifying topos $[FinSet, Set]$ is [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] to the category of finitary [[endofunctors]] on [[Set]] (those that commute with [[filtered colimits]]):

$$
  [FinSet, Set] \simeq End_f(Set)
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Because every [[set]] is the [[filtered colimit]] over its finite [[subsets]].

=--

### The monoidal point of view

Since the category $End_f(Set) \hookrightarrow End(Set)$ of [[finitary monads]] is naturally a [[monoidal category]] under composition, this induces the structure of a (non-cartesian) [[monoidal category]] also on the [[classifying topos]] $[FinSet, Set]$ and hence makes it a [[monoidal topos]]. A [[monoid]] with respect to this monoidal structure is equivalently a [[finitary monad]]. 

A related point of view is that $FinSet^{op}$ is the [[free construction|free]] [[cartesian monoidal category]] generated by an object (or by the terminal category), and its [[free cocompletion]] $[FinSet, Set]$ is the free [[cartesian monoidal category|cartesian]] [[monoidally cocomplete category]] generated by an object. Thus $[FinSet, Set]$ plays the role of a cartesian analogue to $[\mathbb{P}^{op}, Set]$, the free [[symmetric monoidal category|symmetric]] [[monoidally cocomplete category]] on an object, where $\mathbb{P} = Core(FinSet)$ is the [[core]] of [[FinSet]], the [[permutation groupoid]]. And in the same way that $[\mathbb{P}^{op}, Set]$ is a [[monoidal topos]] whose monoids are symmetric or permutative [[operads]] (as discussed at _[operad -- a detailed onceptual treatment](operad#Conceptual)_), so $[FinSet, Set]$ is seen as a monoidal topos whose monoids are cartesian operads, aka [[Lawvere theories]]. Some material on this can be found at _[[toddtrimble:Towards a doctrine of operads]]_.

## The pointed object classifier

Similarly, the [[theory of objects|theory of pointed objects]] $\mathbb{O}_\ast$  is classified by the presheaf topos $[FinSet_\ast, Set]$ on the opposite $FinSet_\ast^{op}$ of the category of finite [[pointed sets]] whose skeleton is [[Segal's category]], hence $[FinSet_\ast, Set]$ is equivalent to the topos of "$\Gamma$-sets": cf. [[Gamma-space]] and for the role as a classifying space the following MO-discussion: [link](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/85600/what-do-gamma-sets-classify) .[^classi]

[^classi]: More generally, classifying toposes for [[Horn theory|universal Horn theories]] $\mathbb{T}$ correspond to the respective toposes of covariant set-valued functors on the category of finitely presentable models of $\mathbb{T}$ (Blass&Scedrov (1983)).

## Related entries

* [[theory of objects]]

* [[classifying topos]]

* [[geometric theory]]

## References

* [[Peter Johnstone|P. T. Johnstone]], _Topos Theory_ , Academic Press New York 1977 (Dover reprint 2014). (sec. 6.3)

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _[[Sketches of an Elephant]]_ , Oxford UP 2002. (section D3.2)

* [[Saunders Mac Lane]], [[Ieke Moerdijk]]: _[[Sheaves in Geometry and Logic]]_, Springer Heidelberg 1994. (sec.VIII.4)

* [[Andreas Blass]], _Classifying topoi and the axiom of infinity_ , Algebra Universalis **26** (1989) pp.341-345. {#blass}

* [[Andreas Blass]], Andrej Scedrov, _Classifying topoi and finite forcing_ , JPAA **28** (1983) pp.111-140.

* [[Marta Bunge]], [[Jonathon Funk]], _Singular Coverings of Toposes_ , Springer LNM **1890** Heidelberg 2006.

* [[Richard Garner]], _Lawvere theories, finitary monads and Cauchy-completion_ , JPAA **218** no.11 (2014) pp.1973–1988. ([preprint](http://comp.mq.edu.au/~rgarner/Papers/FSet.pdf))
 {#Garner13}

* [[Gavin Wraith]], _Topos Elémentaire et Arithmétique_ , Cah. Top. Géom. Diff. Cat. **XIV-2** (1973) pp.217-218. ([proceedings colloque Amiens 1973](http://archive.numdam.org/article/CTGDC_1973__14_2_153_0.pdf), 3.92 MB)

[[!redirects classifying topos for the theory of objects]]
[[!redirects classifying topos for the theory of pointed objects]]