
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
#### Deduction and Induction
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include deduction and induction - contents]]
=--
#### Foundations
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea 

A set $S$ of natural numbers is **recursive** if there is an algorithm which will decide in finitely many steps whether a given natural number belongs to $S$. 

## Definition

A [[subset]] $S$ of the set of [[natural numbers]] $\mathbb{N}$, or more generally of $\mathbb{N}^k$ with $k$ finite, is _recursive_ if there is a total recursive or [[partial recursive function|computable function]] $f: \mathbb{N}^k \to \mathbf{2} = \{0, 1\}$ such that $S = f^{-1}(1)$. Recursive subsets are a proper subclass of the class of _[[recursively enumerable set|recursively enumerable]]_ sets, which are domains of [[partial recursive functions]] $f: \mathbb{N}^k \to \mathbb{N}$, or equivalently images of total recursive functions. 

## Properties

Recursive sets form a [[Boolean algebra|Boolean subalgebra]] of the [[power set]] algebra $P(\mathbb{N})$ (whereas recursively enumerable subsets do not form a Boolean subalgebra). 

## Examples 

* One can encode proofs in the formal theory PA as natural numbers, via a process of G&ouml;del-numbering. The set of codes of such formal proofs is a recursive set. In colloquial language: it is possible to program a computer to detect whether or not a string of symbols represents a valid proof in PA. 

* Therefore, the set of codes of _provable_ propositions is recursively enumerable. However, it is **not** recursive. This is one way of saying that provability in PA cannot be decided by an algorithm, which is closely related to G&ouml;del's incompleteness theorem. 

## Related concepts

* [[definable set]], [[constructible set]]



[[!redirects recursive subsets]]
