
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea

The left part of a pair of [[adjoint functor]]s is one of two best approximations to a [[weak inverse]] of the other functor of the pair.  (The other best approximation is the functor\'s [[right adjoint]], if it exists. )  Note that a weak inverse itself, if it exists, must be a left adjoint, forming an [[adjoint equivalence]].

A left adjoint to a [[forgetful functor]] is called a [[free functor]]; in general, left adjoints may be thought of as being defined freely, consisting of anything that an inverse might want, regardless of whether it works.

The concept generalises immediately to [[enriched category|enriched categories]] and in [[2-category|2-categories]].


## Definitions

Given [[partial order|posets]] (or [[preorder|proset]]s) $C$ and $D$ and a monotone function $U: C \to D$, a __left adjoint__ of $U$ is a monotone function $F: D \to C$ such that
$$ F(x) \leq y \;\Leftrightarrow\; x \leq U(y) $$
for all $x$ in $D$ and $y$ in $C$.

Given [[locally small categories]] $C$ and $D$ and a [[functor]] $U: C \to D$, a __left adjoint__ of $U$ is a functor $F: D \to C$ with a [[natural isomorphism]] between the [[hom-set]] functors
$$ Hom_C(F(-),-), Hom_D(-,U(-)): D \times C^{op} \to Set .$$

Given $V$-enriched categories $C$ and $D$ and a $V$-[[enriched functor]] $U: C \to D$, a __left adjoint__ of $U$ is a $V$-enriched functor $F: D \to C$ with a $V$-[[enriched natural transformation|enriched natural isomorphism]] between the [[hom-object]] functors
$$ Hom_C(F(-),-), Hom_D(-,U(-)): D \times C^{op} \to Set .$$

Given categories $C$ and $D$ and a functor $U: C \to D$, a __left adjoint__ of $U$ is a functor $F: D \to C$ with [[natural transformation]]s
$$ \iota: id_C \to F ; U,\; \epsilon: U ; F \to id_D $$
(where $F;U$ etc gives the [[composite]] in the forwards, anti-Leibniz order) satisfying certain [[triangle identities]].

Given a [[2-category]] $\mathcal{B}$, objects $C$ and $D$ of $\mathcal{B}$, and a morphism $U: C \to D$ in $\mathcal{B}$, a __left adjoint__ of $U$ is a morphism $F: D \to C$ with $2$-morphisms
$$ \iota: id_C \to F ; U,\; \epsilon: U ; F \to id_D $$
satisfying the triangle identities.

Although it may not be immediately obvious, these definitions are all compatible.

Whenever $F$ is a left adjoint of $U$, we have that $U$ is a [[right adjoint]] of $F$.


## Properties

Left adjoint functors preserve

* [[colimit]]s;

* [[epimorphism]]s.

## Related entries

*  See [[Galois connection]] for left adjoints of monotone functions.
*  See [[adjoint functor]] for left adjoints of functors.
*  See [[adjunction]] for left adjoints in $2$-categories.
*  See [[examples of adjoint functors]] for examples.

* [[pro-left adjoint]]

[[!redirects left adjoint -- history]]
[[!redirects left adjoints]]
