
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Limits and colimits
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include infinity-limits - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{: toc}

## Definition

A __fibre product__ or __fiber product__ is a [[product]] in a [[over category|slice category]] $\mathcal{C} \downarrow C$.  The fibre product of two morphisms $f\colon A \to C$, $g\colon B \to C$ is the same as their [[pullback]]; accordingly, a fiber product of more than two morphisms $f_i\colon A_i \to C$ is often called a __wide pullback__. 

More explicitly, for $f\colon A \to C$ and $g\colon B \to C$ two [[morphism]]s in a [[category]] $\mathcal{C}$, the fiber product $A \times_C B$ of $A$ with $B$ over $C$ is, if it exists, [[generalized the|the]] [[pullback]]

$$
  \array{
     A \times_C B &\to& B
     \\
     \downarrow && \downarrow^g
     \\
     A &\stackrel{f}{\to}& C
  }
  \,.
$$

This term comes from thinking of $A$ and $B$ as [[bundle]]s over $C$; then the fiber of $A \times_C B$ over a [[generalized element]] $x$ of $C$ is the [[product]] of the fibers of $A$ and $B$ over $x$.  In other words, the fiber product is the product taken fiber-wise.

Of course, the fiber of $A$ at the generalized element $x\colon I \to C$ is itself a fibre product $I \times_C A$; the terminology depends on your point of view.


## Examples

In $\mathcal{C} =$ [[Set]], the fiber product is given by the usual formula
$$
  A \times_C B = 
  \left\{
    (a,b) \in A \times B \;|\;
    f(a) = g(b) 
  \right\}
  \,.
$$

## Properties

* A category has wide pullbacks (of all [[small category|small]] cardinalities) if and only if it has (binary) [[pullbacks]] and [[cofiltered limits]].

* The [[saturated class of limits|saturation]] of the class of wide pullbacks is the class of limits over categories $C$ whose [[fundamental groupoid]] $\Pi_1(C)$ is trivial.

On the other hand, together with a terminal object, wide pullbacks generate all limits:

+-- {: .num_prop #WidePbToComplete}
###### Proposition 
A [[category]] $C$ with all [[wide pullbacks]] and a [[terminal object]] $1$ is [[complete category|complete]]. If $C$ is complete and $F: C \to D$ preserves wide pullbacks and the terminal object, then it preserves all limits. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof}
######Proof 
To build up arbitrary products $\prod_{i \in I} c_i$ in $C$, take the wide pullback of the family $c_i \to 1$. Then to build equalizers of diagrams $f, g: c \stackrel{\to}{\to} d$, construct the pullback of the diagram 
$$\array{
 & & d \\
 & & \downarrow \delta \\
c & \underset{\langle f, g \rangle}{\to} & d \times d
}$$ 
From products and equalizers, we can get arbitrary limits. 
=--


## Related concepts

* [[pullback]], [[base change]]

* [[lax pullback]], [[comma object]]

* [[(∞,1)-pullback]], [[homotopy pullback]]

## References

* [[Robert Paré]], *Simply connected limits*.  Can. J. Math., Vol. XLH, No. 4, 1990, pp. 731-746, [CMS](http://math.ca/10.4153/CJM-1990-038-6)

[[!redirects fiber product]]
[[!redirects fiber products]]
[[!redirects fibre product]]
[[!redirects fibre products]]
[[!redirects fibered product]]
[[!redirects fibered products]]
[[!redirects fibred product]]
[[!redirects fibred products]]
[[!redirects wide pullback]]
[[!redirects wide pullbacks]]
