
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Enriched category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include enriched category theory contents]]
=--
#### Additive and abelian categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include additive and abelian categories - contents]]
=--
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--




#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn }
###### Definition

An **additive category** is a [[category]] which is

1. an [[Ab-enriched category]];

   (sometimes called a [[pre-additive category]]--this means that each [[hom-set]] is an [[abelian group]] and composition is [[bilinear map|bilinear]])

1. which admits [[finite limit|finite]] [[coproducts]] 

   (and hence, by prop. \ref{ProductsAreBiproducts} below, finite [[products]]).

The natural [[morphisms]] *between* additive categories are [[additive functors]].


=--

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

A [[pre-abelian category]] is an additive category which also has [[kernels]] and [[cokernels]].  Equivalently, it is an Ab-enriched category with all [[finite limits]] and finite [[colimits]].  An especially important sort of additive category is an [[abelian category]], which is a pre-abelian one satisfying the extra exactness property that all [[monomorphisms]] are [[kernels]] and all [[epimorphisms]] are [[cokernels]].  See at _[[additive and abelian categories]]_ for more.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

The [[Ab]]-enrichment of an additive category does not have to be given a priori.  Every [[semiadditive category]] (a category with finite [[biproducts]]) is automatically  [[enriched category|enriched]] over [[commutative monoids]] (as described at _[[biproduct]]_), so an additive category may be defined as a category with finite biproducts whose [[hom-object|hom-monoids]] happen to be [[groups]].  (The requirement that the hom-monoids be groups can even be stated in elementary terms without discussing enrichment at all, but to do so is not very enlightening.)  Note that the entire $Ab$-enriched structure follows automatically for [[abelian category|abelian categories]].

=--

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

Some authors use **additive category** to simply mean an Ab-enriched category, with no further assumptions. It can also be used to mean a $CMon$-enriched (commutative monoid enriched) category, with or without assumptions of products. 

=--




## Properties


+-- {: .num_prop #ProductsAreBiproducts}
###### Proposition

In any [[Ab-enriched category]], any finite [[product]] is also a coproduct, and dually.  This includes the zero-ary case: any [[terminal object]] is also an [[initial object]], hence a [[zero object]] (and dually), hence additive category have a [[zero object]].  

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

Such products which are also coproducts are sometimes called [[biproducts]] and sometimes [[direct sums]]; they are [[absolute limit|absolute limits]] for $Ab$-enrichment.  

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The coincidence of products with biproducts does _not_ extend to infinite products and coproducts.) In fact, an [[Ab-enriched category]] is [[Cauchy complete category|Cauchy complete]] just when it is additive and moreover its [[idempotents]] split.

=--

## Related concepts

* [[semiadditive category]]

* [[abelian category]]

* [[additive (∞,1)-category]]

* [[triangulated category]]

## References

Discussion of [[model category]] structures on additive categories is around def. 4.3 of 

* Apostolos Beligiannis, _Homotopy theory of modules and Gorenstein rings_, Math. Scand. 89 (2001) ([pdf](http://users.uoi.gr/abeligia/mathscand.pdf))
 {#Beligiannis}

[[!redirects additive categories]]