
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Goodwillie calculus
+--{: .hide}
[[!include Goodwillie calculus - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

An [[(∞,1)-functor]] $F \colon \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow \mathcal{D}$ out of an [[(∞,1)-category]] with [[finite (∞,1)-colimits]] is **excisive** if it takes [[(∞,1)-pushout]] squares in $\mathcal{C}$ to [[(∞,1)-pullback]] squares $\mathcal{D}$. 

This is the $n=1$ case of the concept [[n-excisive (∞,1)-functor]].

=--

([HigherAlg, def. 1.4.2.1.](#HigherAlg))

## Properties

### Reflection and excisive approximation


The inclusion of excisive $\infty$-funcors is reflective with reflector $P_1$.

See at _[n-excisive functor -- n-Excisive Approximation and reflection](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/n-excisive+functor#nExcisiveApproximation)_

## Examples

### Spectrum objects

Write $\infty Grpd_{fin}$ for the [[(∞,1)-category]] of [[finite homotopy types]], hence those freely generated by [[finite (∞,1)-colimits]] from the point. Write $\infty Grpd_{fin}^{\ast/}$ for the [[pointed object|pointed]] finite homotopy types.


+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition/Proposition

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be an [[(∞,1)-category]] with [[finite (∞,1)-limits]]. Then a **[[spectrum object]]** in $\mathcal{C}$ is a reduced (i.e. [[terminal object in an (infinity,1)-category|terminal object]]-preserving) [[excisive (∞,1)-functor]] of the form

$$
  \infty Grpd_{fin}^{\ast/} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}
  \,.
$$

=--

([Lurie, def. 1.4.2.8](#HigherAlg)).


### Excisive approximation of reduced functors

Let $\mathcal{C}$ have finite colimits and a terminal object and let $\mathcal{D}$ be differentiable.

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The excisive approximation of a reduced functor $F \colon \mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{D}$ is the [[(infinity,1)-colimit]]

$$
  P_1 F \simeq \underset{\longrightarrow_{\mathrlap{k}}}{\lim} \Omega^k \circ F \circ \Sigma^k
$$

(where $\Omega$ and $\Sigma$ denote [[looping]] and [[suspension]] in $\mathcal{D}$ and in $\mathcal{C}$, respectively).

=--

([Lurie, example 6.1.1.28](#HigherAlg))


## Related concepts

* [[exact (∞,1)-functor]]

* [[n-excisive (∞,1)-functor]]

* [[spectrum object]]

## References

The notion of [[n-excisive functors]] was introduced in 

* [[Thomas Goodwillie]], _Calculus II, Analytic functors_, K-Theory 5 (1991/92), no. 4, 295-332

The [[Taylor tower]] formed by $n$-excisive functors was then studied in

* {#Goodwillie03} [[Thomas Goodwillie]], _Calculus III: Taylor Series_, Geom. Topol. 7(2003) 645-711 ([arXiv:math/0310481](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0310481))
 

A discussion in the general abstract context of [[(∞,1)-category theory]] is in  

* {#HigherAlg} [[Jacob Lurie]], section 6.1.1 of _[[Higher Algebra]]_
  

[[!redirects excisive (∞,1)-functors]]

[[!redirects excisive (infinity,1)-functor]]
[[!redirects excisive (infinity,1)-functors]]

[[!redirects excisive functor]]
[[!redirects excisive functors]]


