
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Limits and colimits
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-limits - contents]]
=--
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{: toc}


## Idea 

A left/right _exact functor_ is a [[functor]] that preserves [[finite limits]]/finite [[colimits]]. 

The term originates in [[homological algebra]], see remark \ref{OriginOfTerminology} below, where a central role is played by [[exact sequences]] (originally of [[modules]], more generally in any [[abelian category]]) and the fact that various [[functors]] preserve or destroy exactness of sequences to some extent gave vital information on those functors.

In this context, one says that an **exact functor** is one that preserves exact sequences.  However, many functors are only "exact on one side or the other".  For instance, for all modules $M$ and [[short exact sequences]] $0 \to A \to B \to C \to 0$  of modules (over some ring $R$), the sequence

$$0 \to Mod_R(M, A) \to Mod_R(M,B) \to Mod_R(M,C)$$ 

is exact -- but note that there is no 0 on the right hand.  Thus $F(-) = Mod_R(M,-)$ converts an exact sequence into a _left_ exact sequence; such a functor is called a **left exact functor**.  Dually, one has **right exact functors**.

It is easy to see that an [[additive functor]] between [[additive categories]] is left exact in this sense if and only if it preserves [[finite limits]].  

Since merely preserving left exact sequences does not require a functor to be additive, in a non-additive context one defines a **left exact functor** to be one which preserves finite limits, and dually. Below we give the [general definition](#Definition) and then discuss the relation to the concept in homological algebra in the section [Properties - On abelian categories](#OnAbelianCategories).


## Definition
 {#Definition}

A [[functor]] between [[finitely complete categories]] is called __left exact__ (or [[flat functor|flat]]) if it preserves [[finite limits]].  Dually, a functor between finitely cocomplete categories is called __right exact__ if it preserves [[finite colimits]].  A functor is called __exact__ if it is both left and right exact.

Specifically, [[Ab]]-[[enriched functor]]s between [[abelian categories]] are exact if they preserve [[exact sequence]]s.

## Properties


### Characterisations

#### General

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition
* A [[functor]] $F : C \to D$ between finitely cocomplete categories is right exact if and only if for all [[objects]] $d \in D$ the [[comma category]] $F/d$ is [[filtered category|filtered]].

* A [[functor]] $F : C \to D$ between finitely complete categories is left exact if and only if for all [[objects]] $d \in D$ the [[opposite category|opposite]] [[comma category]] $(d/F)^{op}$ is [[filtered category|filtered]].
=--

In other language, this says that a functor between finitely complete categories is left exact if and only if it is (representably) [[flat functor|flat]].  Conversely, one can show that a representably flat functor preserves all finite limits that exist in its domain.

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

A functor between categories with finite limits preserves [[finite limit]]s if and only if:

* it preserves [[terminal objects]], binary [[product]]s, and [[equalizer]]s; or

* it preserves [[terminal object]]s and binary [[pullback]]s.

=--


Since these conditions frequently come up individually, it may be worthwhile listing them separately: 

* $F: C \to D$ **preserves terminal objects** if $F(t_C)$ is terminal in $D$ whenever $t_C$ is terminal in $C$; 

* $F: C \to D$ **preserves binary products** if the pair of maps 
$$F(c) \stackrel{F(\pi_1)}{\leftarrow} F(c \times d) \stackrel{F(\pi_2)}{\to} F(d)$$ 
exhibits $F(c \times d)$ as a product of $F(c)$ and $F(d)$, where $\pi_1: c \times d \to c$ and $\pi_2: c \times d \to d$ are the product projections in $C$; 

* $F: C \to D$ **preserves equalizers** if the map 
$$F(i): F(e) \to F(c)$$ 
is the equalizer of $F(f), F(g): F(c) \stackrel{\to}{\to} F(d)$, whenever $i: e \to c$ is the equalizer of $f, g: c \stackrel{\to}{\to} d$ in $C$. 
 


+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Terminology

Some author use the term "left exact" when $C$ does not have all [[finite limits]], defining it to mean a [[flat functor]]. 

'Left exact' is sometimes abbreviated **lex**.  In particular, [[Lex]] is the 2-category of categories with [[finite limits]] and lex functors.  See also [[continuous functor]].   Similarly, but more rarely, 'right exact' is sometimes abbreviated as **rex**.

Left exact functors correspond to [[pro-representable functors]], provided some smallness conditions are satisfied. 

=--

#### Between categories of modules

Right exact functors between [[categories of modules]] are characterized by the _[[Eilenberg-Watts theorem]]_. See there for more details.

### On abelian categories / in homological algebra
 {#OnAbelianCategories}

In the context of [[homological algebra]], the notion of left/right exact functors is considered specifically in [[abelian categories]]. In this context the above formulation is equivalently formulated in terms of the behaviour of the functor on [[short exact sequences]]. We now discuss this case.

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

A functor $F : C \to D$ between [[abelian categories]] is left exact if and only if it preserves [[direct sums]] and [[kernels]]. 

A functor $F : C \to D$ between [[abelian categories]] is right exact if and only if it preserves [[direct sums]] and [[cokernels]].  

=--

+-- {: .num_cor #ExactFunctorPreservesExactSequences}
###### Corollary

In particular for $0 \to A \to B \to C \to 0$ is an [[exact sequence]] in the abelian category $C$, we have that 

* if $F$ is left exact then 

  $$
    0 \to F(A) \to F(B) \to F(C)
  $$

  is an exact sequence in $D$;

* if $F$ is right exact then 

  $$
    F(A) \to F(B) \to F(C) \to 0
  $$

  is an exact sequence in $D$;

* if $F$ is exact then 

  $$
    0 \to F(A) \to F(B) \to F(C) \to 0
  $$

  is an exact sequence in $D$.

Also: if $F$ is exact then it preserves [[chain homology]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

We discuss the first case. The second is formally dual. The third combines the two cases.

For the first case notice that $0 \to A \stackrel{i}{\to} B \stackrel{p}{\to} C \to 0$ being an [[exact sequence]] is equivalent to $i$ being a [[monomorphism]] and $p$ being an [[epimorphism]], hence to $0 \to A$ being the [[kernel]] of $i$, $i$ being the kernel of $p$ and $C \to 0$ being the [[cokernel]] of $p$. Since the functor $F$ is assumed to preserve this kernel-property, but not the cokernel property, it follows that $F(0) \to F(A)$ is the kernel of $F(A) \stackrel{F(i)}{\to} F(B)$, but not more than that. This means that

$$
  0 \to F(A) \to F(B) \to F(C)
$$

is an exact sequence, as claimed.

=--


+-- {: .num_remark #OriginOfTerminology}
###### Remark

The properties of corollary \ref{ExactFunctorPreservesExactSequences} explain the "left"/"right"-terminology: a _left_ exact functor preserves exactness of sequences to the left of a morphism (only), while a _right_ exact functor preserves exactness to the right.

=--




## Related concepts

* **exact functor**, [[derived functor]]

*  [[exact (∞,1)-functor]]

* [[satellite]]

## References


An early use of _left exact_ and _exact_ is in:

*  [[A. Grothendieck]], 1959, _Technique de descente et théorèmes d’existence 
en géométrie algèbrique. II. Le théorème d’existence en théorie formelle
des modules_, in Séminaire Bourbaki, Vol. 5 , Exp. No. 195, 369 – 390, 
Soc. Math. France [Numdam](http://www.numdam.org/numdam-bin/item?id=SB_1958-1960__5__369_0), Paris. 


A general discussion is for instance in section 3.3 of

* [[Masaki Kashiwara]], [[Pierre Schapira]], _[[Categories and Sheaves]]_

A detailed discussion of how the property of a functor being exact is related to the property of it preserving homology in generalized situations is in 

* [[Michael Barr]], _Preserving homology_ , Theory and Applications of Categories,  Vol. 16, 2006, No. 7, pp 132-143. ([TAC](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/16/7/16-07abs.html))

Discussion of left exactness (or [[flat functor]]) in the context of [[(∞,1)-category theory]] is in 

* [[Jacob Lurie]], def. 5.3.2.1 in _[[Higher Topos Theory]]_


[[!redirects exact functors]]

[[!redirects left exact]]
[[!redirects left exact functor]]
[[!redirects left exact functors]]

[[!redirects lex functor]]
[[!redirects lex functors]]

[[!redirects right exact functor]]
[[!redirects right exact functors]]
[[!redirects rex functor]]
[[!redirects rex functors]]

