
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Universes
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include universe - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Partial map classifier
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A partial function $f:A\rightharpoonup B$ between two sets can be turned into a total function $\overline{f}:A\to B_\bot$ by adding a new element $\bot$ to $B$ and sending all $a\in A$ that are not in the domain of definition of $f$ to this new value $\bot$ = "undefined" and the rest just to their value under $f$. This works obviously for all partial functions into $B$ whence $B_\bot$ is a 'classifying object' for these.

More generally, a **partial map classifier** of an [[object]] $B$ in a [[category]] $\mathcal{C}$ is a [[representing object]] for [[partial maps]] with [[codomain]] $B$.

## Definition

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a category with [[pullbacks]].  Recall that a **partial map** $A \rightharpoonup B$ in $\mathcal{C}$ is a [[span]] $A \leftarrow D \to B$ in which the map $D\to A$ is a [[monomorphism]].  The subobject $D \hookrightarrow A$ is called the [[domain]] of the partial map.  Two partial maps are considered *equal* if they are related by an isomorphism of spans; in this way we obtain a [[set]] of partial maps $Par_{\mathcal{C}}(A,B)$.

We can compose a partial map $A\rightharpoonup B$ with a map $B\to B'$ in an obvious way.  We can also compose it with a map $A'\to A$ by pulling back the mono $D\hookrightarrow A$ to $A'$.  In this way $Par_{\mathcal{C}}(-,-)$ becomes a [[profunctor]] from $\mathcal{C}$ to itself.  (In fact, it is the hom-set of another category with the same objects as $\mathcal{C}$.)

A **partial map classifier** for $B$ is an object $B_\bot$ together with an isomorphism
$$ \mathcal{C}(A,B_\bot) \cong Par_{\mathcal{C}}(A,B) $$
natural in $A$.  By the [[Yoneda lemma]] this means there is a universal partial map $B_\bot \rightharpoonup B$.


## Constructions

In a [[Boolean category|Boolean]] [[extensive category]] (such as a [[Boolean topos]], we can define the partial map classifier as $B_\bot = B + 1$, where $1$ is the [[terminal object]].  This is because in an extensive category, a map $A\to B+1$ is equivalent to a decomposition of $A$ as a [[coproduct]] $D+E$ together with a map $D\to B$ (the map $E\to 1$ being unique), and in a Boolean category every subobject of $A$ is complemented and hence induces such a coproduct decomposition.  The universal partial map $B+1 \rightharpoonup B$ has domain the summand $B$, on which it is the identity.  Note that $B\mapsto B+1$ is also known as the [[maybe monad]].

Partial map classifiers also exist in every [[elementary topos]], but in the non-Boolean case they are harder to construct.  In the [[internal logic]], $B_\bot$ can be defined in two ways:


*  $B_\bot$ is a [[subobject]] of the [[power object]] $\mathcal{P}B$ consisting of the [[subsingleton]] subobjects of $B$.  In this case, the universal partial map $B_\bot \rightharpoonup B$ has domain the set of [[singleton]] subobjects of $B$, on which it is an isomorphism.

*  $B_\bot$ is the object of partial maps $1 \rightharpoonup B$.  In this case, the universal partial map $B_\bot \rightharpoonup B$ has domain the set of partial maps which are total, on which it is an isomorphism.

Note that neither of these constructions is [[predicative mathematics|predicative]].  The second makes more sense in a [[higher category]] (or in its internal logic such as [[homotopy type theory]]).

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

In an [[constructive mathematics|intuitionistic context]], $B + 1$ still classifies something: namely partial maps $A \rightharpoonup B$ whose domain of definition is a [[decidable subset|decidable subobject]] of $A$.

In [[type theory]] one uses the partiality [monad](monad+%28in+computer+science) to treat general recursion as an algebraic effect. In this we we obtain a classifier for recursively enumerable subsets. Is [this](http://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/ralf.hinze/WG2.8/22/slides/tarmo.pdf) the first appearance?
It is clear that this idea can be generalized to other classes of propositions.
=--

## Properties

* In a topos, the partial map classifier $B_\bot$ of $B$ is [[injective object|injective]]. The canonical embedding $B\rightarrowtail B_\bot$ shows accordingly that a topos _has enough injectives_!

* In a topos, the [[subobject classifier]] $true:1\rightarrow\Omega$ coincides with the monomorphism $\eta:1\rightarrowtail 1_\bot$.

* In a topos, the assignment of $B_\bot$ to $B$ is functorial.

## References {#References}

* [[Francis Borceux|F. Borceux]], _Handbook of Categorical Algebra - vol. 3_ , Cambridge UP 1994.  (sec.5.5)

Section 1.2 of

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _Topos theory_, London Math. Soc. Monographs __10__, Acad. Press 1977, xxiii+367 pp. (Dover reprint 2014)

A2.4 of the [[Elephant]]

[[!redirects partial map classifier]]
[[!redirects partial map classifiers]]