
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea

By regarding a [[simplicial set]] as an [[object]] in the standard [[model structure on simplicial sets]], one effectively identifies it (up to weak equivalence) with that [[∞-groupoid]] that it presents under [[Kan fibrant replacement]].

If the original simplicial set is the [[nerve]] of a [[category]], the corresponding Kan fibrant replacement is something like the _$\infty$-groupoidification_ of that category: see [[geometric realization of categories]].

This way each ordinary category models an [[∞-groupoid]]. The _Thomason_ [[model category]] structure on [[Cat]] exhibits this: in this [[model category]] a morphism between two categories is a weak equivalence, precisely if it induces a weak equivalence of the corresponding $\infty$-groupoids.

It turns out the Thomason model structure on [[Cat]] is [[Quillen equivalence|Quillen equivalent]] to the standard [[model structure on simplicial sets]].

This is remarkable, in that it says that every [[homotopy n-type|homotopy type]], i. e. every weak equivalence class of $\infty$-groupoids, is obtained by $\infty$-groupoidifying just categories.

In fact, every cofibrant object in this structure is a [[poset]]. Since every object in a model category is weakly equivalent to a cofibrant one, this means that even the [[nerve]]s of just posets are sufficient to model all homotopy types.


This is a rather curious aspect of the [[Robert Thomason|Thomason]] model on [[Cat]]: it does not really have anything intrinsically to do with [[category|categories]], but rather uses these as a way to present [[∞-groupoid]]s. It particular, it does not see the [[equivalence of categories|equivalences of categories]]. 
There is a _different_ model structure on [[Cat]] in which weak equivalences are the "true" weak [[equivalence of categories|equivalences of categories]] (not of anything constructed from them). This is called the [[canonical model structure on Cat]].

## Related concepts

* [[basic localizer]]

* [[Dwyer map]]

* [[homotopy hypothesis]]

* [[model structure on simplicial sets]], [[model structure on topological spaces]]

* [[Strøm model structure]]


## References

The original reference is

*  [[Robert Thomason|R. W. Thomason]], _Cat as a closed model category_,
Cahiers Topologie Géom. Différentielle **21**, no. 3 (1980), pp. 305--324. MR0591388 (82b:18005) <a href="http://www.numdam.org/numdam-bin/fitem?id=CTGDC_1980__21_3_305_0">numdam scan</a>

A correction to this article was made in

* [[Denis-Charles Cisinski]], _Les morphisme de Dwyer ne sont pas stables par r&eacute;tractes_, Cahiers Topologie et G&eacute;om. Diff&eacute;rentielle Cat&eacute;goriques, **40** no. 3 (1999), pp. 227--231. ([Numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CTGDC_1999__40_3_227_0))

There it was clarified that every cofibrant object in the Thomason model structure is a [[poset]]. 

A useful review of the Thomason model structure and a generalization of the model structure to [[n-fold category|n-fold categories]] is given in 

* Thomas M. Fiore, [[Simona Paoli]], _A Thomason Model Structure on the Category of Small n-fold Categories_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/0808.4108))

The following article gives a large class of categories which are [[fibrant]] in the Thomason model structure.

* [[Lennart Meier]], [[Viktoriya Ozornova]], _Fibrancy of partial model categories_,
[pdf](http://people.virginia.edu/~flm5z/PartialModCats.pdf), [slides](http://people.virginia.edu/~flm5z/Kopenhagen2014.pdf).

Some posets that are cofibrant in the Thomason model structure are studied in

* Roman Bruckner, Christoph Pegel, _Cofibrant objects in the Thomason Model Structure_, [arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.05448)

The analog of the Thomason model structure for the _stable_ case -- an equivalence between connective [[stable homotopy theory]] and [[nerve]]s of [[symmetric monoidal categories]] -- is discussed in 

* [[Robert Thomason]], _Symmetric monoidal categories model all connective spectra_ , Theory and applications of Categories, Vol. 1, No. 5, (1995) pp. 78-118