
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

The concept of _$G$-CW  complex_ is to that of [[CW-complexes]] as [[topological G-spaces]] are to [[topological spaces]]: for $G$ a [[compact topological group]], the notion of _$G$-CW-complex_ is much like that of [[CW-complex]], only that where in the latter case one builds a [[topological space]] from gluing of [[disks]] $D^n$ ("[[cell complex|cells]]") for a $G$-CW-complex one glues [[products]] of [[disks]] with $G$-[[orbits]] $G/H$ ([[coset spaces]]) for [[compact Lie group|compact]] [[subgroups]] $H$.

These are cofibrant spaces used in $G$-[[equivariant homotopy theory]].

## Properties

### For $G$-manifolds

If a [[compact Lie group]] $G$ acts on a [[compact topological space|compact]] [[smooth manifold]] $X$, then the manifold admit an equivariant triangulation. In particular it has the structure of a G-CW complex. 

([Illman 83, theorem 7.1, corollary 7.2](#Illman83)) Recalled as ([ALR 07, theorem 3.2](#ALR07)).

Moreover, if the manifold does have a boundary, then its G-CW complex may be chosen such that the boundary is a G-subcomplex. ([Illman 83, last sentence above theorem 7.1](#Illman83))




### Elmendorf's theorem

The collection of $G$-CW-complexes has a [[full sub-(infinity,1)-category|full embedding]] into the [[(infinity,1)-presheaves]] on the [[orbit category]] $Orb(G)$.  This is given by sending a $G$-CW complex, $Y$, to the presheaf sending $G/H$ to $Y^H$, the subspace of $Y$ fixed by $H$.

See at _[[Elmendorf's theorem]]_.

## References

A standard reference is

* {#May96} [[Peter May]], sections I.3 of _Equivariant homotopy and cohomology theory_ CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics, vol. 91, Published for the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, Washington, DC, 1996. With contributions by M. Cole, G. Comezana, S. Costenoble, A. D. Elmenddorf, J. P. C. Greenlees, L. G. Lewis, Jr., R. J. Piacenza, G. Triantafillou, and S. Waner. ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/u/faculty/doug/otherpapers/alaska1.pdf))

Section X.2 there discusses the generalization to [[RO(G)-grading]].

See also

* Jay Shah, _Equivariant algebraic topology_, [pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/VIGRE/VIGRE2010/REUPapers/Shah.pdf)

* {#Illman83} [[Sören Illman]], _The equivariant triangulation theorem for actions of compact Lie groups_, Math. Ann. 262 (1983), no. 4, 487–501 ([web](http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/img/?PID=GDZPPN002323249))

* {#ALR07} A. Adem, J. Leida and Y. Ruan, _Orbifolds and Stringy Topology_, Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics **171** (2007) ([pdf](http://www.math.colostate.edu/~renzo/teaching/Orbifolds/Ruan.pdf))


[[!redirects G-CW complexes]]

[[!redirects G-CW-complex]]
[[!redirects G-CW-complexes]]

[[!redirects G-cell complex]]
[[!redirects G-cell complexes]]
