pages/1060.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition ##

There are two useful equivalent formulation of the definition

+-- {: .num_defn #DefByDualizingObject}
###### Definition

A _$*$-autonomous category_  is a [[symmetric monoidal
category|symmetric]] [[closed monoidal category]] $\langle
C,\otimes, I\rangle$ with a _[[dualizing object in a closed category]]_: an object
$\bot$ such that the canonical morphism
$$ d_A: A \to (A \multimap \bot) \multimap \bot ,$$
which is the transpose of the [[evaluation map]]
$$ ev_{A,\bot}: (A \multimap \bot) \otimes A \to \bot ,$$
is an [[isomorphism]] for all $A$.  (Here, $\multimap$ denotes the [[internal hom]].)

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #DefByDualization}
###### Definition

A _$*$-autonomous category_  is a [[symmetric monoidal category]] $\mathcal{C}$
equipped with a [[full and faithful functor|full and faithful]] [[functor]]

$$
  (-)^\ast \colon \mathcal{C}^{op} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}
$$

such that there is a [[natural isomorphism]]

$$
  \mathcal{C}(A \otimes B, C^\ast) \simeq \mathcal{C}(A, (B\otimes C)^\ast)
  \,.
$$

=--


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

These two definitions, def. \ref{DefByDualizingObject}
and def. \ref{DefByDualization}, are indeed equivalent.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Given def. \ref{DefByDualizingObject}, 
define the dualization functor as the [[internal hom]] into the [[dualizing object in a closed category|dualizing object]]

$$
  (-)^ \ast  \coloneqq (-)\multimap\bot
  \,.
$$  

Then the morphism $d_A$
is natural in $A$, so that there is a [[natural isomorphism]]
$d:1\Rightarrow(-)^{**}$.  We also have

$$\begin{aligned}
\hom(A\otimes B,C^*)& = \hom(A\otimes B, C\multimap\bot) \\
& \cong \hom((A\otimes B)\otimes C,\bot) \\
& \cong \hom(A\otimes(B\otimes C), \bot) \\
& \cong \hom(A,(B\otimes C)\multimap\bot) \\
& = \hom(A,(B\otimes C)^*)
\end{aligned}$$

This yields the structure of def. \ref{DefByDualization}.

Conversely, given the latter then the [[dualizing object]] $\bot$ is defined as the dual of the [[tensor unit]] $\bot \coloneqq I^*$.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

A $\ast$-autonomous category in which the [[tensor product]] is compatible with duality in that there is a [[natural isomorphism]]

$$
  (A \otimes B)^\ast \simeq A^\ast \otimes B^\ast
$$

is a [[compact closed category]].

Conversely, if the $\ast$-autonomous category is not compact closed, then by this linear " [[de Morgan duality]]" the tensor product induces a second binary operation

$$
  A \parr B \coloneqq  (A^\perp \otimes B^\perp)^\perp
  \,.
$$

making it into a [[linearly distributive category]].  Here the notation on the left is that used in [[linear logic]], see below at _[Properties -- Internal logic](#InternalLogic)_.

=--




## Properties

### Internal logic
 {#InternalLogic}

The [[internal logic]] of star-autonomous categories is the multiplicative fragment of [[classical linear logic]], conversely star-autonomous categories are the [[categorical semantics]] of [[classical linear logic]] ([Seely 89, prop. 1.5](#Seely89)). See also at _[[relation between type theory and category theory]]_.

## Examples ##

* A simple example of a $*$-autonomous category is the category of finite-dimensional [[vector space]]s over some field $k$.  In this case $k$ itself plays the role of the dualizing object, so that for an f.d. vector space $V$, $V^*$ is the usual [[dual vector space|dual space]] of linear maps into $k$.

* More generally, any [[compact closed category]] is $*$-autonomous with the unit $I$ as the dualizing object.

* A more interesting example of a $*$-autonomous category is the category of [[sup-lattice]]s and sup-preserving maps (= left adjoints). Clearly the poset of sup-preserving maps $hom(A, B)$ is itself a sup-lattice, so this category is closed. The free sup-lattice on a poset $X$ is the internal hom of posets $[X^{op}, \Omega]$; in particular the poset of truth values $\Omega$ is a unit for the closed structure. Define a duality $ (-)^* $ on sup-lattices, where $ X^* = X^{op} $ is the opposite poset (inf-lattices are sup-lattices), and where $ f^*: Y^* \to X^* $ is the left adjoint of $f^{op}: X^{op} \to Y^{op}$. In particular, take as dualizing object $D = \Omega^{op}$. Some simple calculations show that under the tensor product defined by the formula $ (X \multimap Y^*)^* $, the category of sup-lattices becomes a $*$-autonomous category. 

* Another interesting example is due to Yuri Manin: the category of [[quadratic algebra]]s. A **quadratic algebra** over a [[field]] $k$ is a graded algebra $A = T(V)/I$, where $V$ is a finite-dimensional vector space in degree 1, $T(V)$ is the tensor algebra (the free $k$-algebra generated by $V$), and $I$ is a graded ideal generated by a subspace $R \subseteq V \otimes V$ in degree 2; so $R = I_2$, and $A$ determines the pair $(V, R)$. A morphism of quadratic algebras is a morphism of graded algebras; alternatively, a morphism $(V, R) \to (W, S)$ is a linear map $f: V \to W$ such that $(f \otimes f)(R) \subseteq S$. Define the dual $A^*$ of a quadratic algebra given by a pair $(V, R)$ to be that given by $(V^*, R^\perp)$ where $R^\perp \subseteq V^* \otimes V^*$ is the kernel of the transpose of the inclusion $i: R \subseteq V \otimes V$, i.e., there is an exact sequence 
$$0 \to R^\perp \to V^* \otimes V^* \overset{i^*}{\to} R^* \to 0$$ 
Define a tensor product by the formula 
$$(V, R) \otimes (W, S) = (V \otimes W, (1_V \otimes \sigma \otimes 1_W)(R \otimes S))$$
where $\sigma: V \otimes W \to W \otimes V$ is the symmetry. The unit is the tensor algebra on a 1-dimensional space. The hom that is adjoint to the tensor product is given by the formula $A \multimap B = (A \otimes B^*)^*$, and the result is a $*$-autonomous category. 

* In a similar vein, I am told that there is a $*$-autonomous category of [[quadratic operad]]s. 

* Girard's [[coherence spaces]], developed as models of [[linear logic]], give an historically important example of a $*$-autonomous category. 

* Hyland and Ong have given a completeness theorem for multiplicative linear logic in terms of a $*$-autonomous category of _fair games_, part of a series of work on game semantics for closed category theory (compare Joyal's interpretation of Conway games as forming a compact closed category). 

* The [[Chu construction]] can be used to form many more examples of $*$-autonomous categories. 

* A [[quantale]] (see there) is a $\ast$-autonomous category if it has a [[dualizing object]].

## References ##

The notion is originally due to

* [[Michael Barr]], _$*$-Autonomous Categories_. LNM 752, Springer-Verlag 1979.

The relation to [[linear logic]] was first described in 

*  [[R. A. G. Seely]],  _Linear logic, $\ast$-autonomous categories and cofree coalgebras_, _Contemporary Mathematics_ 92, 1989.  ([[SeelyLinearLogic.pdf:file]], [ps.gz](http://www.math.mcgill.ca/rags/nets/llsac.ps.gz))
 {#Seely89}

and a detailed review (also of a fair bit of plain monoidal category theory) is in 
 
* [[Paul-André Melliès]] , _Categorial Semantics of Linear Logic_, in _Interactive models of computation and program behaviour_, Panoramas et synthèses 27, 2009 ([pdf](http://www.pps.univ-paris-diderot.fr/~mellies/papers/panorama.pdf))

Examples from algebraic geometry are given here:

* Mitya Boyarchenko and Vladimir Drinfeld, A duality formalism in the spirit of Grothendieck and Verdier, arXiv:1108.6020 ([pdf](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1108.6020v2.pdf))

These authors call any closed monoidal category with a [[dualizing object in a closed category|dualizing object]] a **Grothendieck-Verdier category**, thanks to the examples coming from [[Verdier duality]].

Here it is explained how $*$-autonomous categories give Frobenius pseudomonads in the 2-category where morphisms are [[profunctors]]:

*  Ross Street, Frobenius monads and pseudomonoids, J. Math. Physics 45 (2004) 3930-3948. ([pdf](http://www.math.mq.edu.au/~street/Frob.pdf))

[[!redirects star-autonomous categories]]
[[!redirects *-autonomous category]]
[[!redirects *-autonomous categories]]
[[!redirects star-autonomous]]
[[!redirects *-autonomous]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 108745 Revision date: 2016-05-15 00:20:48 Page name: star-autonomous category Author: Mike Shulman IP address: 76.167.222.204

pages/1060.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition ##

There are two useful equivalent formulation of the definition

+-- {: .num_defn #DefByDualizingObject}
###### Definition

A _$*$-autonomous category_  is a [[symmetric monoidal
category|symmetric]] [[closed monoidal category]] $\langle
C,\otimes, I\rangle$ with a _[[dualizing object in a closed category]]_: an object
$\bot$ such that the canonical morphism
$$ d_A: A \to (A \multimap \bot) \multimap \bot ,$$
which is the transpose of the [[evaluation map]]
$$ ev_{A,\bot}: (A \multimap \bot) \otimes A \to \bot ,$$
is an [[isomorphism]] for all $A$.  (Here, $\multimap$ denotes the [[internal hom]].)

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #DefByDualization}
###### Definition

A _$*$-autonomous category_  is a [[symmetric monoidal category]] $\mathcal{C}$
equipped with a [[full and faithful functor|full and faithful]] [[functor]]

$$
  (-)^\ast \colon \mathcal{C}^{op} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}
$$

such that there is a [[natural isomorphism]]

$$
  \mathcal{C}(A \otimes B, C^\ast) \simeq \mathcal{C}(A, (B\otimes C)^\ast)
  \,.
$$

=--


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

These two definitions, def. \ref{DefByDualizingObject}
and def. \ref{DefByDualization}, are indeed equivalent.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Given def. \ref{DefByDualizingObject}, 
define the dualization functor as the [[internal hom]] into the [[dualizing object in a closed category|dualizing object]]

$$
  (-)^ \ast  \coloneqq (-)\multimap\bot
  \,.
$$  

Then the morphism $d_A$
is natural in $A$, so that there is a [[natural isomorphism]]
$d:1\Rightarrow(-)^{**}$.  We also have

$$\begin{aligned}
\hom(A\otimes B,C^*)& = \hom(A\otimes B, C\multimap\bot) \\
& \cong \hom((A\otimes B)\otimes C,\bot) \\
& \cong \hom(A\otimes(B\otimes C), \bot) \\
& \cong \hom(A,(B\otimes C)\multimap\bot) \\
& = \hom(A,(B\otimes C)^*)
\end{aligned}$$

This yields the structure of def. \ref{DefByDualization}.

Conversely, given the latter then the [[dualizing object]] $\bot$ is defined as the dual of the [[tensor unit]] $\bot \coloneqq I^*$.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

A $\ast$-autonomous category in which the [[tensor product]] is compatible with duality in that there is a [[natural isomorphism]]

$$
  (A \otimes B)^\ast \simeq A^\ast \otimes B^\ast
$$

is a [[compact closed category]].

Conversely, if the $\ast$-autonomous category is not compact closed, then by this linear " [[de Morgan duality]]" the tensor product induces a second binary operation

$$
  A \parr B \coloneqq  (A^\perp \otimes B^\perp)^\perp
  \,.
$$

making it into a [[linearly distributive category]].  Here the notation on the left is that used in [[linear logic]], see below at _[Properties -- Internal logic](#InternalLogic)_.

A general $\ast$-autonomous category can be thought of as like a [[compact closed category]] in which the [[unit]] and [[counit]] of the [[dual objects]] refer to two different tensor products: we have $\top \to A \parr A^*$ but $A^* \otimes A \to \bot$, where $(\otimes,\top)$ and $(\parr,\bot)$ are two different monoidal structures.  The necessary relationship between two such monoidal structures such that this makes sense, i.e. such that the [[triangle identities]] can be stated, is encoded by a linearly distributive category; then an $\ast$-autonomous category is precisely a linearly distributive category in which all such "mixed duals" (or "negations") exist.


=--




## Properties

### Internal logic
 {#InternalLogic}

The [[internal logic]] of star-autonomous categories is the multiplicative fragment of [[classical linear logic]], conversely star-autonomous categories are the [[categorical semantics]] of [[classical linear logic]] ([Seely 89, prop. 1.5](#Seely89)). See also at _[[relation between type theory and category theory]]_.

## Examples ##

* A simple example of a $*$-autonomous category is the category of finite-dimensional [[vector space]]s over some field $k$.  In this case $k$ itself plays the role of the dualizing object, so that for an f.d. vector space $V$, $V^*$ is the usual [[dual vector space|dual space]] of linear maps into $k$.

* More generally, any [[compact closed category]] is $*$-autonomous with the unit $I$ as the dualizing object.

* A more interesting example of a $*$-autonomous category is the category of [[sup-lattice]]s and sup-preserving maps (= left adjoints). Clearly the poset of sup-preserving maps $hom(A, B)$ is itself a sup-lattice, so this category is closed. The free sup-lattice on a poset $X$ is the internal hom of posets $[X^{op}, \Omega]$; in particular the poset of truth values $\Omega$ is a unit for the closed structure. Define a duality $ (-)^* $ on sup-lattices, where $ X^* = X^{op} $ is the opposite poset (inf-lattices are sup-lattices), and where $ f^*: Y^* \to X^* $ is the left adjoint of $f^{op}: X^{op} \to Y^{op}$. In particular, take as dualizing object $D = \Omega^{op}$. Some simple calculations show that under the tensor product defined by the formula $ (X \multimap Y^*)^* $, the category of sup-lattices becomes a $*$-autonomous category. 

* Another interesting example is due to Yuri Manin: the category of [[quadratic algebra]]s. A **quadratic algebra** over a [[field]] $k$ is a graded algebra $A = T(V)/I$, where $V$ is a finite-dimensional vector space in degree 1, $T(V)$ is the tensor algebra (the free $k$-algebra generated by $V$), and $I$ is a graded ideal generated by a subspace $R \subseteq V \otimes V$ in degree 2; so $R = I_2$, and $A$ determines the pair $(V, R)$. A morphism of quadratic algebras is a morphism of graded algebras; alternatively, a morphism $(V, R) \to (W, S)$ is a linear map $f: V \to W$ such that $(f \otimes f)(R) \subseteq S$. Define the dual $A^*$ of a quadratic algebra given by a pair $(V, R)$ to be that given by $(V^*, R^\perp)$ where $R^\perp \subseteq V^* \otimes V^*$ is the kernel of the transpose of the inclusion $i: R \subseteq V \otimes V$, i.e., there is an exact sequence 
$$0 \to R^\perp \to V^* \otimes V^* \overset{i^*}{\to} R^* \to 0$$ 
Define a tensor product by the formula 
$$(V, R) \otimes (W, S) = (V \otimes W, (1_V \otimes \sigma \otimes 1_W)(R \otimes S))$$
where $\sigma: V \otimes W \to W \otimes V$ is the symmetry. The unit is the tensor algebra on a 1-dimensional space. The hom that is adjoint to the tensor product is given by the formula $A \multimap B = (A \otimes B^*)^*$, and the result is a $*$-autonomous category. 

* In a similar vein, I am told that there is a $*$-autonomous category of [[quadratic operad]]s. 

* Girard's [[coherence spaces]], developed as models of [[linear logic]], give an historically important example of a $*$-autonomous category. 

* Hyland and Ong have given a completeness theorem for multiplicative linear logic in terms of a $*$-autonomous category of _fair games_, part of a series of work on game semantics for closed category theory (compare Joyal's interpretation of Conway games as forming a compact closed category). 

* The [[Chu construction]] can be used to form many more examples of $*$-autonomous categories. 

* A [[quantale]] (see there) is a $\ast$-autonomous category if it has a [[dualizing object]].

## References ##

The notion is originally due to

* [[Michael Barr]], _$*$-Autonomous Categories_. LNM 752, Springer-Verlag 1979.

The relation to [[linear logic]] was first described in 

*  [[R. A. G. Seely]],  _Linear logic, $\ast$-autonomous categories and cofree coalgebras_, _Contemporary Mathematics_ 92, 1989.  ([[SeelyLinearLogic.pdf:file]], [ps.gz](http://www.math.mcgill.ca/rags/nets/llsac.ps.gz))
 {#Seely89}

and a detailed review (also of a fair bit of plain monoidal category theory) is in 
 
* [[Paul-André Melliès]] , _Categorial Semantics of Linear Logic_, in _Interactive models of computation and program behaviour_, Panoramas et synthèses 27, 2009 ([pdf](http://www.pps.univ-paris-diderot.fr/~mellies/papers/panorama.pdf))

Examples from algebraic geometry are given here:

* Mitya Boyarchenko and Vladimir Drinfeld, A duality formalism in the spirit of Grothendieck and Verdier, arXiv:1108.6020 ([pdf](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1108.6020v2.pdf))

These authors call any closed monoidal category with a [[dualizing object in a closed category|dualizing object]] a **Grothendieck-Verdier category**, thanks to the examples coming from [[Verdier duality]].

Here it is explained how $*$-autonomous categories give Frobenius pseudomonads in the 2-category where morphisms are [[profunctors]]:

*  Ross Street, Frobenius monads and pseudomonoids, J. Math. Physics 45 (2004) 3930-3948. ([pdf](http://www.math.mq.edu.au/~street/Frob.pdf))

[[!redirects star-autonomous categories]]
[[!redirects *-autonomous category]]
[[!redirects *-autonomous categories]]
[[!redirects star-autonomous]]
[[!redirects *-autonomous]]
