
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In the context of [[arithmetic geometry]] a _regulator_ is a certain map from [[algebraic K-theory]] to suitable [[ordinary cohomology]].

Regulators are used in the study of [[L-functions]] for instance in the context of the [[Bloch-Kato conjecture]].

The simplest example of such regulators are

* the [[analytic class number formula]];

* the [[Dedekind zeta-function]] of $K$;

* the Dirichlet regulator map, discussed below.


These regulators can be understood to be essentially the [[Chern characters]] in [[algebraic K-theory]] ([Tamme 12](#Tamme12)), which has a particularly natural construction in [[differential algebraic K-theory]] ([Bunke-Tamme 12](#BunkeTamme12))

## Definition

### Dirichlet and Borel regulator
 {#BorelRegulator}

For $R$ a [[ring]], $K R$ denoting its [[algebraic K-theory]] [[spectrum]] and $\Sigma^n H \mathbb{R}$ a [[suspension]] of the [[Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]] of the [[real numbers]], then a regulator of $K R$-[[cohomology theory]] is a [[homomorphism]] of [[spectra]]

$$
  r_{\sigma,p} \;\colon\; K R \longrightarrow \Sigma^p H \mathbb{R}
$$

or equivalently is the induced [[cohomology operations]]. e.g. ([Bunke-Tamme 12, 1.2](#BunkeTamme12))

If here $R$ is the [[ring of integers]] of a [[number field]] and $\sigma \colon R \hookrightarrow \mathbb{C}$ is a choice of embedding into the [[complex numbers]], then the _Borel regulator_ ([Borel 74](#Borel74)) is of this form, for odd $p$, such that its induced [[cohomology operation]]

$$
  r_{\sigma,p} \;\colon\; K_1(R) \longrightarrow \mathbb{R}
$$

is the _Dirichlet regulator_ given by

$$
  u \mapsto log {\vert \sigma(u) \vert}
  \,.
$$

A description of this in [[differential algebraic K-theory]] is in ([Bunke-Tamme  12, 1.2](#BunkeTamme12)):

for $X$ a [[smooth manifold]], then a class in $K R^0(X)$ is represented by  a [[finitely generated module|finitely generated]] [[projective module|projective]] $R$-[[module bundle]] $V \to X$. Write

$$
  cycl(V) \in K R^0(X)
$$

for this class. 

Under the chosen embedding $\sigma$ we have the [[complexification]] $V \otimes_\sigma \mathbb{C}$ of this [[module bundle]], which is a [[complex vector bundle]] with (because $R$ is geometrically [[discrete object|discrete]]) a [[flat connection]] $\nabla_{V_\sigma}$.  

The choice of hermitean structure on $V_\sigma$, hence a [[reduction of the structure group]] to the [[unitary group]] induces an adjoint connection $\nabla_{V_\sigma}^\ast$. Write then 

$$
  CS_p(\nabla_{V_\sigma}^\ast, \nabla_{V_\sigma})
$$

for the relative [[Chern-Simons form]] between these two connections, hence for the [[transgression]] of the relative [[Chern character]] in degree $p+1$. 

This is a closed differential form, (the Kamber-Tondeur form, see [Bismut-Lott 95](#BismutLott95)).

This differential form represents, via the [[de Rham theorem]] [[isomorphism]], the Dirichlet regulator above

$$
  r_{\sigma,p}(cycl(V))
  \simeq
  [CS_p(\nabla_{V_\sigma}^\ast, \nabla_{V_\sigma})]
  \in 
  H_{dR}^p(X) \simeq H^p(X,\mathbb{R})
  \,.
$$

In [[differential algebraic K-theory]] this construction can be refined from landing in [[de Rham cohomology]] to landing in genuine [[ordinary differential cohomology]] ([[higher prequantization]]), hence with $CS_p(\nabla_{V_\sigma}^\ast, \nabla_{V_\sigma})$ itself realized as the [[curvature]] of a [[circle n-bundle with connection|circle (p-1)-bundle with connection]].

## Properties

### Becker-Gottlieb transfer and GRR for algebraic K-theory
 {#BeckerGottliebTransfer}

For $\pi \colon X \to B$ a [[proper map|proper]] [[submersion]] of [[smooth manifolds]], there is a variant of [[fiber integration in generalized cohomology]] given by the [[Becker-Gottlieb transfer]] in some $E$-[[cohomology theory]]

$$
  tr_\pi \;\colon\; E^\ast(X) \longrightarrow E^\ast(B)
  \,.
$$

Moreover, for the above [[sheaves]] of $R$-[[modules]] $cycl(V)$ we have the [[direct image]] sheaves $\pi_\ast V$ and there is an identity

$$
  \underset{i \geq 0}{\sum} (-1)^i cycl(R^i \pi_\ast(V))
  \simeq
  tr_\pi(cycl(V))
$$ 

in $K R(B)$. The [above](#BorelRegulator) Borel-Dirichlet regulator $r_{\sigma,p}$ is such that it preseves this as an identity in $H(X,\mathbb{R})$. Hence it plays a role here analogous that of the [[Chern character]] in the [[Grothendieck-Riemann-Roch theorem]].

The [[Becker-Gottlieb transfer]] refines in turn to [[differential cohomology]], hence [[differential algebraic K-theory]] mapping to [[ordinary differential cohomology]], according to ([Bunke-Gepner 13](BunkeGepner13)). 

However, the above relation between direct image of sheaves and push-forward in cohomology receives a correction when refined to [[differential algebraic K-theory]], a correction by a term in the image of the inclusion $a(-)$ of differential forms into [[differential cohomology]], by the [[transfer index conjecture]] one has


$$
  \underset{i \geq 0}{\sum} (-1)^i \widehat{cycl}(R^i \pi_\ast(V))
   + a(something)
  \simeq
  \widehat{tr}_\pi(\widehat{cycl}(V))
$$ 

where the hats denote the [[differential cohomology]] refinement.


See at _[[Becker-Gottlieb transfer]]_.




## References

The Bott regulator is due to 

* [[Armand Borel]], _Stable real cohomology of arithmetic groups_, Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup. (4) 7 (1974), 235-272 (1975). MR 0387496 
  {#Borel74}

The relation to [[Chern characters]] is made very explicit in

* {#Tamme12} [[Georg Tamme]], _Karoubi's relative Chern character and Beilinson's regulator_, Ann. Sci. Ec. Norm. Super. (4) 45 (2012), no. 4, 601-636. ([[TammeRegulator.pdf:file]])
 

The interpretation of these regulator Chern characters in [[differential algebraic K-theory]] is due to


* [[Ulrich Bunke]], [[David Gepner]], _Differential function spectra, the differential Becker-Gottlieb transfer, and applications to differential algebraic K-theory_ ([arXiv:1306.0247](http://arxiv.org/abs/1306.0247))
 {#BunkeGepner13}

* [[Ulrich Bunke]], [[Georg Tamme]], _Regulators and cycle maps in higher-dimensional differential algebraic K-theory_ ([arXiv:1209.6451](http://arxiv.org/abs/1209.6451))
 {#BunkeTamme12}

based on 


* [[Jean-Michel Bismut]], [[John Lott]], _Flat vector bundles, direct images and
higher real analytic torsion_, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 8 (1995), no. 2, 291-363.
 {#BismutLott95}

See also

* {#Weibel84} [[Charles Weibel]], _Algebraic K-theory and the Adams e-invariant_, in _Algebraic K-theory, number theory, geometry and analysis _(Bielefeld, 1982), volume 1046 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 442-450. Springer, Berlin, 1984. 61 [pdf](http://www.math.illinois.edu/K-theory/handbook/1-139-190.pdf)

* {#Suslin84} A.A. Suslin, _On the K-theory of local fields_, In Proceedings of the Luminy conference on algebraic K-theory (Luminy, 1983), volume 34, pages 301-318, 1984.

* Wikipedia, _[Beilinson regulator](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beilinson_regulator)_

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$




[[!redirects Beilinson regulators]]

[[!redirects Beilinson's regulator]]
[[!redirects Beilinson's regulators]]

[[!redirects Borel regulator]]
[[!redirects Borel regulators]]

[[!redirects Dirichlet regulator]]
[[!redirects Dirichlet regulators]]

[[!redirects regulator]]
[[!redirects regulators]]