#Idea#

From a modern perspective, homological algebra is the study of those [[stable infinity-category|stable objects]] whose [[homotopy category of an (infinity,1)-category|homotopy category]] is the [[derived category]] of an [[abelian category]].

+-- {+ .query}
_Zoran_: with this viewpoint objects are more important than  the task of defining derived functors; at least for many practioners the main task is to define derived versions of
non-exact maps; measuring non-exactiness or if you like correcting it by total derived functors whenever necessaty. 
Of course, it si srot in linearized contexts, that is why homotopical algebra is kind of subsuming the first. I hope some wording can incorporate the othe rpoint of view as well. Nonabelian homological algebra of Bourn, Borceux, Janlidze and others can not be done within homotopy theory, so there are generalization which are more categorical less 
homotopical in nature. That is why they invented "protomodular categoriews", "homological categories", "semiabelian categories" and so on it seems to me (plus lookoing for setups for osme phenomena in universal algebra). So the natural setup for homological algebra is not necessarily within homotopical context. if it is then the stabel point of view above is correct. 


[[Tim Porter|Tim]]: I would support a different wording as well. The above does not make clear that, say, group (co)homology or Lie algebra (co)homology might be considered as subclasses of 'homological algebra'.  It also does not really include the crossed homological algebra that Ronnie has developed.  There is also the point, which sometime I will make more precise, that homological algebra is a linearised version of homotopical algebra and that there are crossed, quadratic and so on versions intermediate between the two.  

I am also slightly worried by too much emphasis on 'stable' as this can be a 'weasel word' like 'progress'!

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: please feel free to improve and expand on the wording! 

=--

So homological algebra studies in particular the [[homology]] of [[chain complex]]es in [[abelian category|abelian categories]] -- therefore the name.

The most refined 1-categorical approximation to the right context in which such [[chain complex]]es live is axiomatized by the structure of a [[triangulated category]]. The true context however is the corresponding [[stable infinity-category]], of which the triangulated category in question is just the [[homotopy category of an (infinity,1)-category|homotopy category]].

#related entries#

* [[additive and abelian categories]]

* [[chain complex]]

* [[derived category]]

* [[triangulated category]]
 

#References#

* Weibel, _Homological algebra_

* J. Lurie, [[Stable Infinity-Categories]]