
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A _May spectral sequence_ ([May 64](#May64), [May 74](#May74), [Ravenel 86, 3.2](#Ravenel86)) is a certain type of [[spectral sequence]] that computes the second page of the [[classical Adams spectral sequence]]. More generally, it computes [[Ext]]-groups (or [[Cotor]]-groups, via [this lemma](cotensor+product#ComoduleHomInTermsOfCotensorProduct)) of [[comodules]] over [[commutative Hopf algebras]] (the [[dual Steenrod algebra]] in the classical case). 

The May spectral sequence is the [[spectral sequence of a filtered complex]] induced by filtering the canonical (but intractable) [[bar complex]] model for [[Ext]]/[[Cotor]] by co-powers of the unit co-ideal of the given Hopf algebra (see [Ravenel 86, chapter 3, section 2](#Ravenel86), [Kochman 96, section 5.3](#Kochman96)).


## Construction of the May spectral sequence

Throughout, let $A$ be a [[commutative ring]] and let $\Gamma$ be a graded [[commutative Hopf algebroid|commutative Hopf algebra]] over $A$. We write $(\Gamma,A)$ for this data.


> sketch


lemma. if $A = \mathbb{F}_2$ and $\Gamma$ is an exterior algebra on [[primitive elements]] $\{x_i\}$,  then 

$$
  Ext_\Gamma(A,A) \simeq A[x_1, x_2, \cdots]
$$

(if $A$ is a field of characteristic other than 2, this remains true if all the $x_i$ are odd graded)

([Ravenel 86, lemma 3.1.9](#Ravenel86), [Kochman 96, prop. 3.7.5](#Kochman96))


lemma. If $(\Gamma,A)$ is filtered and $N_1$ and $N_2$ are compatibly filtered comodules, then there is a spectral sequence

$$
  \mathcal{E}_1
  =
  Ext_{gr \Gamma}(gr N_1, gr N_2)
  \;\Rightarrow\;
  Ext_{\Gamma}(N_1, N_2)
$$

converging to the [[Ext]] over $\Gamma$, with first page the Ext over the [[associated graded]] $gr \Gamma$.

([Ravenel 86, lemma 3.1.9](#Ravenel86), [Kochman 96, prop. 3.7.5](#Kochman96))

Proof: The filtering induces a filtering on the standard bar complex which computes $Ext_\Gamma$. The spectral sequence in question is the corresponding [[spectral sequence of a filtered complex]].

$\,$

Let now $A \coloneqq \mathbb{F}_2$,  $\Gamma \coloneqq \mathcal{A}^\bullet_{\mathbb{F}_2}$ be the mod 2 [[dual Steenrod algebra]]. Recall that as a $\mathbb{F}_2$-algebra this is

$$
  \mathcal{A}^\bullet_{\mathbb{F}_2} 
  = 
  \mathbb{F}_2[\xi_1, \xi_2, \cdots]
  \,.
$$

and the coproduct is given by

$$
  \Psi(\xi_n)
  =
  \underoverset{k = 0}{n}{\sum} \xi_{n-k}^{p^k} \otimes \xi_k
  \,,
$$

where $\xi_0 \coloneqq 1$.


Choose degrees of generators as

$$
  {\vert \xi_i^{2^j} \vert}
  \coloneqq
  2i-1
$$

([Ravenel 86, p.69](#Ravenel86)) and consider the [[filtration]]

$$
  \cdots 
   \subset
  F^p \mathcal{A}^\ast_{\mathbb{F}_2}
   \subset
  F^{p+1} \mathcal{A}^\ast_{\mathbb{F}_2}
    \subset 
  \cdots 
    \subset
  \mathcal{A}^\ast_{\mathbb{F}_2}
$$

which at filtering stage $p$ contains all elements of total degree $\leq p$.

Observe then that

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \Psi(\xi_n)
    &
   =
   \underset{deg = 2n-1}{\underbrace{\xi_{n} \otimes 1}}
   +
    \underoverset{0 \lt k \lt n}{}{\sum} 
     \underset{deg = 2n-2}{\underbrace{\xi_{n-k}^{p^k} \otimes \xi_k}}
   +
    \underset{deg = 2n-1}{\underbrace{1 \otimes \xi_n}}
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

This means that in the [[associated graded]] $gr_\bullet \mathcal{A}^\ast_{\mathbb{F}_2}$ all the generators $\xi_n$ become [[primitive elements]]:

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \Psi(\xi_n)
    &
   =
   \underset{deg = 2n-1}{\underbrace{\xi_{n} \otimes 1}}
   +
    \underset{deg = 2n-1}{\underbrace{1 \otimes \xi_n}}
   \;\;\;\;
   \in
   F^{2n-1}\mathcal{A}^\ast_{\mathbb{F}_2}/F^{2n-2}\mathcal{A}^\ast_{\mathbb{F}_2}
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$


By Hopf structure theory this means that $gr\mathcal{A}^\ast_{\mathbb{F}_2}$ is an exterior algebra. Hence the above lemma applies and says that

$$
  Ext_{gr \mathcal{A}^\bullet_{\mathbb{F}_2}}(\mathbb{F}_2,\mathbb{F}_2)
  =
  P(\{\xi_n^{2^j}\})  
$$

Finally then the other lemma says that this is the first page of a spectral sequence of the form

$$
  \mathcal{E}_1 
  = 
  P(\{\xi_n^{2^j}\})
  \;\Rightarrow\;
  Ext_{\mathcal{A}^\ast_{\mathbb{F}_2}}(\mathbb{F}_2,\mathbb{F}_2)
  \,.
$$

By that same lemma, the differentials on any $r$-page are the restriction of the differentials of the bar complex to the $r$-almost cycles ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+I#DifferentialsOnAlmostChains)). The differential of the bar complex is the alternating sum of the coproduct on $\Gamma$. Hence on generators 

$$
  d_1 (\xi_n^{2^k})
  =
  \underoverset{j = 0}{n}{\sum}  \xi_{n-j}^{2^{k+j}} \otimes \xi_j^{2^k}
  \,.
$$

This is the May spectral sequence.

## The second page of the classical Adams spectral sequence


Now we use the above formula to explicitly compute the cohomology of the first page of the May spectral sequence.

In doing so it is now crucial that the standard bar complex resolution for $Ext$ is built from $\overline{\Gamma} \coloneqq coker(\eta)$ instead of from $\Gamma$. In $\overline{\Gamma}$ the generator $\xi_0 = 1$ has disappeared.

Hence we find

$$
  d_1(\xi_1^{2^k})
  =
  \xi_1^{2^k} \underset{= 0}{\underbrace{\xi_0^{2 k}}}
  + 
  \underset{= 0}{\underbrace{\xi_0^{2^{k+1}}}} \xi_1^{2^k}
  = 
  0
$$

and hence all the

$$
  h_i \coloneqq \xi_1^{2^i}
$$

are cocycles. 

Similarly for instance

$$
  d_1(\xi_2) 
    = 
  \xi_2 \underset{= 0}{\underbrace{\xi_0}}
    +
  \xi_1^{2} \xi_1
    +
  \underset{= 0}{\underbrace{\xi_0}} \xi_2
$$

and so this is not a cocycle, but gives the relation that the product

$$
  \xi_1^{2} \xi_1 = 0
$$

in cohomology. And so forth.



## Related concepts

* [[Curtis algorithm]]

## References

The origin is in 

* {#May64} [[Peter May]],  _The cohomology of restricted Lie algebras and of Hopf algebras; application to the Steenrod algebra_, (Thesis) Journal of Algebra 3, 123-146 (1966) ([pdf](http://math.uchicago.edu/~may/PAPERS/3.pdf))
 

More on the $E_2$-term is in 

* {#May74} [[Peter May]] _The Steenrod algebra and its associated graded algebra_, University of Chicago preprint, 1974.

A computation of the first 70 differentials for the case of the [[Steenrod algebra]] is in 

* [[Martin Tangora]], _On the cohomology of the Steenrod algebra_, Math. Z. 116 (1970), 18–64.

Review includes

* {#Ravenel86} [[Doug Ravenel]], chapter 3, section 2 of _[[Complex cobordism and stable homotopy groups of spheres]]_, 1986

* {#Kochman96} [[Stanley Kochman]], section 5.3 of _[[Bordism, Stable Homotopy and Adams Spectral Sequences]]_, AMS 1996

* Wikipedia, _[May spectral sequence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/May_spectral_sequence)_

[[!redirects May spectral sequences]]