
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Stable homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A [[model structure on spectra]] for [[orthogonal spectra]].

The [[category]] of _orthogonal spectra_  is a [[presentable (∞,1)-category|presentation]] of the [[symmetric monoidal (∞,1)-category]] [[stable (infinity,1)-category of spectra|of spectra]], with the special property that it implements the [[smash product of spectra]] such as to yield itself a [[symmetric monoidal category|symmetric]] [[monoidal model category|monoidal]] [[model category of spectra]]: the _[[model structure on orthogonal spectra]]_. This implies in particular that with respect to this [[symmetric smash product of spectra]] an [[E-∞ ring]] is presented simply as a plain [[commutative monoid]] [[internalization|in]] orthogonal spectra.



## Homotopy theory of orthogonal spectra

#### Categorical algebra
 {#MonoidalAndEnrichedCategories}

When defining a [[commutative ring]] as an [[abelian group]] $A$ equipped with an [[associativity|associative]], commutative and [[unit|untial]] [[bilinear map|bilinear]] pairing

$$
  A \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} A \overset{(-)\cdot (-)}{\longrightarrow} A
$$

one evidently makes crucial use of the [[tensor product of abelian groups]] $\otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}$. That tensor product itself gives the [[category]] [[Ab]] of all abelian groups a structure similar to that of a ring, namely it equips it with a pairing

$$
  Ab \times Ab 
    \overset{(-)\otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}(-)}{\longrightarrow}
  Ab
$$

that is a [[functor]] out of the [[product category]] of [[Ab]] with itself, satisfying category-theoretic analogs of the properties of associativity, commutativity and unitality.

One says that a ring $A$ is a _[[commutative monoid]]_ in the category [[Ab]] of abelian groups, and that this concept makes sense since $Ab$ itself is a _[[symmetric monoidal category]]_.

Now in [[stable homotopy theory]], as we have seen [above](#StableHomotopyCategory), the category [[Ab]] is improved to the [[stable homotopy category]] $Ho(Spectra)$ (def. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategory}), or rather to any [[stable model category|stable]] [[model structure on spectra|model structure on spectra]] presenting it. Hence in order to correspondingly refine commutative monoids in [[Ab]] (namely [[commutative rings]]) to commutative monoids in [[Ho(Spectra)]] (namely [[commutative ring spectra]]), there needs to be a suitable [[symmetric monoidal category]] structure on the category of spectra. Its analog of the [[tensor product of abelian groups]] is to be called the _[[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]]_. The problem is how to construct it.

The theory for handling such a problem is _[[categorical algebra]]_. Here we discuss the minimum of categorical algebra that will allow us to elegantly construct the [[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]].




##### Topological ends and coends
 {#TopologicalEndsAndCoends}

For working with pointed [[topologically enriched functors]], a certain shape of [[limits]]/[[colimits]] is particularly relevant: these are called (pointed topological enriched) _[[ends]]_ and _[[coends]]_. We here introduce these and then derive some of their basic properties, such as notably the expression for topological [[left Kan extension]] in terms of [[coends]] (prop. \ref{TopologicalLeftKanExtensionBCoend} below). Further below it is via left Kan extension along the ordinary smash product of pointed topological spaces ("[[Day convolution]]") that the [[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]] is induced.

+-- {: .num_defn #OppositeAndProductOfPointedTopologicallyEnrichedCategory}
###### Definition

Let $\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D}$ be pointed [[topologically enriched categories]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)), i.e. [[enriched categories]] over $(Top_{cg}^{\ast/}, \wedge, S^0)$ from example \ref{PointedTopologicalSpacesWithSmashIsSymmetricMonoidalCategory}. 

1. The **pointed topologically enriched [[opposite category]]** $\mathcal{C}^{op}$ is the [[topologically enriched category]] with the same [[objects]] as $\mathcal{C}$, with [[hom-spaces]]

   $$
     \mathcal{C}^{op}(X,Y)
     \coloneqq
     \mathcal{C}(Y,X) 
   $$

   and with [[composition]] given by [[braiding]] followed by the composition in $\mathcal{C}$:

   $$
     \mathcal{C}^{op}(X,Y)
     \wedge
     \mathcal{C}^{op}(Y,Z)
     =
     \mathcal{C}(Y,X)\wedge \mathcal{C}(Z,Y)
     \underoverset{\simeq}{\tau}{\longrightarrow}
     \mathcal{C}(Z,Y) \wedge \mathcal{C}(Y,X)
       \overset{\circ_{Z,Y,X}}{\longrightarrow}
     \mathcal{C}(Z,X)
     =
     \mathcal{C}^{op}(X,Z) 
     \,.
   $$

1. the **pointed topological [[product category]]** $\mathcal{C} \times \mathcal{D}$ is the [[topologically enriched category]] whose [[objects]] are [[pairs]] of objects $(c,d)$ with $c \in \mathcal{C}$ and $d\in \mathcal{D}$, whose [[hom-spaces]] are the [[smash product]] of the separate hom-spaces

   $$
     (\mathcal{C}\times \mathcal{D})((c_1,d_1),\;(c_2,d_2) )
       \coloneqq
     \mathcal{C}(c_1,c_2)\wedge \mathcal{D}(d_1,d_2)
   $$

   and whose [[composition]] operation is the [[braiding]] followed by the [[smash product]] of the separate composition operations:

   $$
     \array{
       (\mathcal{C}\times \mathcal{D})((c_1,d_1), \; (c_2,d_2))
         \wedge
       (\mathcal{C}\times \mathcal{D})((c_2,d_2), \; (c_3,d_3))
       \\
       {}^{\mathllap{=}}\downarrow
       \\
       \left(\mathcal{C}(c_1,c_2) \wedge \mathcal{D}(d_1,d_2)\right)
         \wedge
       \left(\mathcal{C}(c_2,c_3) \wedge \mathcal{D}(d_2,d_3)\right)
       \\
       \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\tau}}_{\mathrlap{\simeq}}
       \\
       \left(\mathcal{C}(c_1,c_2)\wedge \mathcal{C}(c_2,c_3)\right)
         \wedge
       \left( \mathcal{D}(d_1,d_2)\wedge \mathcal{D}(d_2,d_3)\right)
         &\overset{
             (\circ_{c_1,c_2,c_3})\wedge (\circ_{d_1,d_2,d_3})
           }{\longrightarrow}
         &
       \mathcal{C}(c_1,c_3)\wedge \mathcal{D}(d_1,d_3)
       \\
       && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{=}}
       \\
       && (\mathcal{C}\times \mathcal{D})((c_1,d_1),\; (c_3,d_3))
     }
    \,.
   $$

=--

+-- {: .num_example #PointedTopologicalFunctorOnProductCategory}
###### Example

A pointed [[topologically enriched functor]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor)) into $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctorsToTopk)) out of a pointed topological [[product category]] as in def. \ref{OppositeAndProductOfPointedTopologicallyEnrichedCategory} 

$$
  F 
    \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{C} \times \mathcal{D}
    \longrightarrow
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
$$

(a "pointed topological [[bifunctor]]") has component maps of the form

$$
  F_{(c_1,d_1),(c_2,d_2)}
    \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{C}(c_1,c_2)
  \wedge
  \mathcal{D}(d_1,d_2)
    \longrightarrow
  Maps(F_0((c_1,d_1)),F_0((c_2,d_2)))_\ast
  \,.
$$

By functoriality and under passing to [[adjuncts]] ([cor.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#SmashHomAdjunctionOnPointedCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpaces)) this is equivalent to two commuting _[[actions]]_


$$
  \rho_{c_1,c_2}(d)
   \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{C}(c_1,c_2) \wedge F_0((c_1,d)) 
    \longrightarrow
  F_0((c_2,d))
$$

and

$$
  \rho_{d_1,d_2}(c)
    \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{D}(d_1,d_2) \wedge F_0((c,d_1))
    \longrightarrow
  F_0((c,d_2))
  \,.
$$

In the special case of a functor out of the [[product category]] of some $\mathcal{C}$ with its [[opposite category]] (def. \ref{OppositeAndProductOfPointedTopologicallyEnrichedCategory})

$$
  F 
    \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{C}^{op} \times \mathcal{C}
    \longrightarrow
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
$$

then this takes the form of a "pullback action" in the first variable

$$
  \rho_{c_2,c_1}(d)
   \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{C}(c_1,c_2) \wedge F_0((c_2,d)) 
    \longrightarrow
  F_0((c_1,d))
$$

and a "pushforward action" in the second variable

$$
  \rho_{d_1,d_2}(c)
    \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{C}(d_1,d_2) \wedge F_0((c,d_1))
    \longrightarrow
  F_0((c,d_2))
  \,.
$$


=--


+-- {: .num_defn #EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash}
###### Definition

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[small category|small]] pointed [[topologically enriched category]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)), i.e. an [[enriched category]] over $(Top_{cg}^{\ast/}, \wedge, S^0)$ from example \ref{PointedTopologicalSpacesWithSmashIsSymmetricMonoidalCategory}. Let

$$
  F 
    \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{C}^{op} \times \mathcal{C}
    \longrightarrow
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
$$

be a pointed [[topologically enriched functor]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor)) out of the pointed topological [[product category]] of $\mathcal{C}$ with its [[opposite category]], according to def. \ref{OppositeAndProductOfPointedTopologicallyEnrichedCategory}.


1. The  **[[coend]]** of $F$, denoted $\overset{c \in \mathcal{C}}{\int} F(c,c)$, is the [[coequalizer]] in $Top_{cg}^{\ast}$ ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#DescriptionOfLimitsAndColimitsInTop), [exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#CoequalizerInTop), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LimitsAndColimitsOfPointedObjects), [cor.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#kTopIsCoreflectiveSubcategory)) of the two actions encoded in $F$ via example \ref{PointedTopologicalFunctorOnProductCategory}:

   $$
     \underset{c,d \in \mathcal{C})}{\coprod} \mathcal{C}(c,d) \wedge F(c,d)
      \underoverset
        {\underset{\underset{c,d}{\sqcup} \rho_{(d,c)}(c) }{\longrightarrow}}
        {\overset{\underset{c,d}{\sqcup} \rho_{(c,d)}(d) }{\longrightarrow}}
        {\phantom{AAAAAAAA}}
     \underset{c \in \mathcal{C}}{\coprod} F(c,c)
      \overset{coeq}{\longrightarrow}
     \overset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int} F(c,c)
     \,.
   $$

1. The **[[end]]** of $F$, denoted $\underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int} F(c,c)$, is the **[[equalizer]]** in $Top_{cg}^{\ast/}$ ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#DescriptionOfLimitsAndColimitsInTop), [exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#EqualizerInTop), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LimitsAndColimitsOfPointedObjects), [cor.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#kTopIsCoreflectiveSubcategory)) of the [[adjuncts]] of the two actions encoded in $F$ via example \ref{PointedTopologicalFunctorOnProductCategory}:

   $$
     \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int} F(c,c)
       \overset{\;\;equ\;\;}{\longrightarrow}
     \underset{c \in \mathcal{C}}{\prod} F(c,c)
      \underoverset   
        {\underset{\underset{c,d}{\sqcup} \tilde \rho_{(c,d)}(d)  }{\longrightarrow}}
        {\overset{\underset{c,d}{\sqcup} \tilde\rho_{d,c}(c)}{\longrightarrow}}
        {\phantom{AAAAAAAA}}
      \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\prod}
      Maps\left( \mathcal{C}\left(c,d\right), \;  F\left(c,d\right) \right)_\ast
     \,.
   $$

=--

+-- {: .num_example #CoendGivesQuotientByDiagonalGroupAction}
###### Example

Let $G$ be a [[topological group]]. Write $\mathbf{B}(G_+)$ for the pointed [[topologically enriched category]] that has a single object $\ast$, whose single [[hom-space]] is $G_+$ ($G$ with a basepoint freely adjoined ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#BasePointAdjoined)))

$$
  \mathbf{B}(G_+)(\ast,\ast) \coloneqq G_+
$$

and whose composition operation in the product operation $(-)\cdot(-)$ in $G$ under adjoining basepoints ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#WedgeAndSmashOfBasePointAdjoinedTopologicalSpaces))

$$
  G_+ \wedge G_+
   \simeq
  (G \times G)_+
    \overset{((-)\cdot (-))_+}{\longrightarrow}
   G_+
  \,.
$$

Then a [[topologically enriched functor]]

$$
  (X,\rho_l) \;\colon\; \mathbf{B}(G_+) \longrightarrow Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
$$

is a pointed topological space $X \coloneqq F(\ast)$ equipped with a continuous function

$$
  \rho_l \;\colon\; G_+ \wedge X \longrightarrow X
$$

satisfying the [[action]] property. Hence this is equivalently a continuous and basepoint-preserving left [[action]] (non-linear [[representation]]) of $G$ on $X$.

The [[opposite category]] (def. \ref{OppositeAndProductOfPointedTopologicallyEnrichedCategory}) $(\mathbf{B}(G_+))^{op}$ comes from the [[opposite group]]

$$
  (\mathbf{B}(G_+))^{op}
  =
  \mathbf{B}(G^{op}_+)
  \,.
$$

(The canonical continuous isomorphism $G \simeq G^{op}$ induces a canonical euqivalence of topologically enriched categories $(\mathbf{B}(G_+))^{op} \simeq \mathbf{B}(G_+)$.) 

So a topologically enriched functor

$$
  (Y,\rho_r) \;\colon\; (\mathbf{B}(G_+))^{op} \longrightarrow Top^{\ast}_{cg}
$$

is equivalently a basepoint preserving continuous _right_ action of $G$.

Then the [[coend]] of two such functors (def. \ref{EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash}) is equivalently the canonical smash product of a right $G$-action with a left $G$-action, hence the [[quotient topological space|quotient]] of the plain smash product by the [[diagonal action]] of the group $G$:

$$
  \overset{\ast \in \mathbf{B}(G_+)}{\int}
   (Y,\rho_r)(\ast) \,\wedge\, (X,\rho_l)(\ast)
  \;\simeq\;
  Y \wedge_G X
  \,.
$$


=--

+-- {: .num_example #NaturalTransformationsViaEnds}
###### Example

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[small category|small]] pointed [[topologically enriched category]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)). For 
$
  F,G
  \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{C}
    \longrightarrow
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
$
two pointed [[topologically enriched functors]], then the [[end]] (def. \ref{EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash}) of $Maps(F(-),G(-))_\ast$ is a topological space whose underlying [[pointed set]] is the pointed set of [[natural transformations]] $F\to G$ ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor)):

$$
  U
  \left(
    \underset{c \in \mathcal{C}}{\int} Maps(F(c),G(c))_\ast
  \right)
  \;\simeq\;
  Hom_{[\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]}(F,G)
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The underlying pointed set functor $U\colon Top^{\ast/}_{cg}\to Set^{\ast/}$ [[preserved limit|preserves]] all [[limits]] ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#DescriptionOfLimitsAndColimitsInTop), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LimitsAndColimitsOfPointedObjects), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#kTopIsCoreflectiveSubcategory)). Therefore there is an [[equalizer]] diagram in $Set^{\ast/}$ of the form

$$
  U
  \left(
    \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
    Maps(F(c),G(c))_\ast
  \right)
    \overset{equ}{\longrightarrow}
  \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\prod} Hom_{Top^{\ast/}_{cg}}(F(c),G(c))
      \underoverset   
        {\underset{\underset{c,d}{\sqcup} U(\tilde \rho_{(c,d)}(d))  }{\longrightarrow}}
        {\overset{\underset{c,d}{\sqcup} U(\tilde\rho_{d,c}(c))}{\longrightarrow}}
        {\phantom{AAAAAAAA}}
   \underset{c,d\in \mathcal{C}}{\prod}
    Hom_{Top^{\ast/}_{cg}}(
      \mathcal{C}(c,d),
      Maps(F(c),G(d))_\ast
    )
  \,.
$$

Here the object in the middle is just the set of collections of component morphisms $\left\{ F(c)\overset{\eta_c}{\to} G(c)\right\}_{c\in \mathcal{C}}$. The two parallel maps in the equalizer diagram take such a collection to the functions which send any $c \overset{f}{\to} d$ to the result of precomposing

$$
  \array{
    F(c)
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{f(f)}}\downarrow
    \\
    F(d) &\underset{\eta_d}{\longrightarrow}& G(d)
  }
$$

and of postcomposing

$$
  \array{
    F(c) &\overset{\eta_c}{\longrightarrow}& G(c)
    \\
    && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{G(f)}}
    \\
    && G(d)
  }
$$

each component in such a collection, respectively. These two functions being equal, hence the collection $\{\eta_c\}_{c\in \mathcal{C}}$ being in the equalizer, means precisley that for all $c,d$ and all $f\colon c \to d$ the square

$$
  \array{
    F(c) &\overset{\eta_c}{\longrightarrow}& G(c)
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{F(f)}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{G(f)}}
    \\
    F(d) &\underset{\eta_d}{\longrightarrow}& G(g)
  }
$$

is a [[commuting square]]. This is precisley the condition that the collection $\{\eta_c\}_{c\in \mathcal{C}}$ be a [[natural transformation]].

=--

Conversely, example \ref{NaturalTransformationsViaEnds} says that [[ends]] over [[bifunctors]] of the form $Maps(F(-),G(-)))_\ast$ constitute [[hom-spaces]] between pointed [[topologically enriched functors]]:


+-- {: .num_defn #PointedTopologicalFunctorCategory}
###### Definition

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[small category|small]] pointed [[topologically enriched categories]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)). Define the structure of a pointed [[topologically enriched category]] on the category $[\mathcal{C}, Top_{cg}^{\ast/}]$ of pointed [[topologically enriched functors]] to $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctorsToTopk)) by taking the [[hom-spaces]] to be given by the [[ends]] (def. \ref{EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash}) of example \ref{NaturalTransformationsViaEnds}:

$$
  [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](F,G)
    \;\coloneqq\;
  \int_{c\in \mathcal{C}} Maps(F(c),G(c))_\ast
$$

The [[composition]] operation on these is defined to be the one induced by the composite maps

$$
  \left(
    \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int} Maps(F(c),G(c))_\ast
  \right)
  \wedge
  \left(
    \underset{c \in \mathcal{C}}{\int} Maps(G(c),H(c))_\ast
  \right)
    \overset{}{\longrightarrow}
  \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\prod}
    Maps(F(c),G(c))_\ast \wedge Maps(G(c),H(c))_\ast
  \overset{(\circ_{F(c),G(c),H(c)})_{c\in \mathcal{C}}}{\longrightarrow}
  \underset{c \in \mathcal{C}}{\prod}
    Maps(F(c),H(c))_\ast
  \,,
$$

where the first, morphism is degreewise given by projection out of the limits that defined the ends. This composite evidently equalizes the two relevant adjunct actions (as in the proof of example \ref{NaturalTransformationsViaEnds}) and hence defines a map into the end

$$
    \left(
    \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int} Maps(F(c),G(c))_\ast
  \right)
  \wedge
  \left(
    \underset{c \in \mathcal{C}}{\int} Maps(G(c),H(c))_\ast
  \right)
  \longrightarrow
  \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int} Maps(F(c),H(c))_\ast
  \,.
$$


The resulting pointed [[topologically enriched category]] $[\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ is also called the **$Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$-[[enriched functor category]]** over $\mathcal{C}$ with coefficients in $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$.

=--

This yields an equivalent formulation in terms of ends of the pointed topologically [[enriched Yoneda lemma]] ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedYonedaLemma)):

+-- {: .num_prop #YonedaReductionTopological}
###### Proposition
**(topologically [[enriched Yoneda lemma]])**

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[small category|small]] pointed [[topologically enriched categories]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)). For $F \colon \mathcal{C}\to Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ a pointed [[topologically enriched functor]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor)) and for $c\in \mathcal{C}$ an object, there is a [[natural isomorphism]]

$$
  [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](\mathcal{C}(c,-),\; F)
  \;\simeq\;
  F(c)
$$

between the [[hom-space]] of the pointed topological functor category, according to def. \ref{PointedTopologicalFunctorCategory}, from the [[representable functor|functor represented]] by $c$ to $F$, and the value of $F$ on $c$.

In terms of the [[ends]] (def. \ref{EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash}) defining these [[hom-spaces]], this means that

$$
  \underset{d\in \mathcal{C}}{\int} Maps(\mathcal{C}(c,d), F(d))_\ast
    \;\simeq\;
  F(c)
  \,.
$$

In this form the statement is also known as **[[Yoneda reduction]]**.

=--

The **proof** of prop. \ref{YonedaReductionTopological} is essentially dual to the proof of the next prop. \ref{TopologicalCoYonedaLemma}.

Now that [[natural transformations]] are phrased in terms of [[ends]] (example \ref{NaturalTransformationsViaEnds}), as is the Yoneda lemma (prop. \ref{YonedaReductionTopological}), it is natural to consider the [[formal duality|dual]] statement involving [[coends]]:

+-- {: .num_prop #TopologicalCoYonedaLemma}
###### Proposition
**([[co-Yoneda lemma]])**

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[small category|small]] pointed [[topologically enriched categories]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)). For $F \colon \mathcal{C}\to Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ a pointed [[topologically enriched functor]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor)) and for $c\in \mathcal{C}$ an object, there is a [[natural isomorphism]]

$$
  F(-)
    \simeq
  \overset{c \in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
  \mathcal{C}(c,-) \wedge F(c)
  \,.
$$

Moreover, the morphism that hence exhibits $F(c)$ as the [[coequalizer]] of the two morphisms in def. \ref{EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash} is componentwise the canonical action 

$$
  \mathcal{C}(d,c) \wedge F(c)
   \longrightarrow
  F(d)
$$

which is [[adjunct]] to the component map $\mathcal{C}(d,c) \to Maps(F(c),F(d))_{\ast}$ of the [[topologically enriched functor]] $F$.

=--

(e.g. [MMSS 00, lemma 1.6](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The coequalizer of pointed topological spaces that we need to consider has underlying it a coequalizer of underlying pointed sets  ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#DescriptionOfLimitsAndColimitsInTop), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LimitsAndColimitsOfPointedObjects), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#kTopIsCoreflectiveSubcategory)). That in turn is the colimit over the diagram of underlying sets with the basepointe adjoined to the diagram ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LimitsAndColimitsOfPointedObjects)). For a coequalizer diagram adding that extra point to the diagram clearly does not change the colimit, and so we need to consider the plain coequalizer of sets.

That is just the set of [[equivalence classes]] of [[pairs]]

$$
  ( c \overset{}{\to} c_0,\; x  )
  \;\; 
   \in 
   \mathcal{C}(c,c_0) \wedge F(c)
  \,,
$$

where two such pairs

$$
  ( c \overset{f}{\to} c_0,\; x \in F(c) )
  \,,\;\;\;\;
  ( d \overset{g}{\to} c_0,\; y \in F(d) )  
$$

are regarded as equivalent if there exists

$$
  c \overset{\phi}{\to} d
$$

such that 

$$
  f = g \circ \phi
  \,,
  \;\;\;\;\;and\;\;\;\;\;
  y = \phi(x)
  \,.
$$

(Because then the two pairs are the two images of the pair $(g,x)$ under the two morphisms being coequalized.)

But now considering the case that $d = c_0$ and $g = id_{c_0}$, so that $f = \phi$ shows that any pair

$$
  ( c \overset{\phi}{\to} c_0, \; x \in F(c))
$$

is identified, in the coequalizer, with the pair

$$
  (id_{c_0},\; \phi(x) \in F(c_0))
  \,,
$$ 

hence with $\phi(x)\in F(c_0)$. 

This shows the claim at the level of the underlying sets. To conclude it is now sufficient ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#DescriptionOfLimitsAndColimitsInTop)) to show that the topology on $F(c_0) \in Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ is the [[final topology]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#InitialAndFinalTopologies)) of the system of component morphisms

$$
  \mathcal{C}(d,c) \wedge F(c)
    \longrightarrow
  \overset{c}{\int} \mathcal{C}(c,c_0) \wedge F(c)
$$

which we just found. But that system includes 

$$
  \mathcal{C}(c,c) \wedge F(c) \longrightarrow F(c)
$$

which is a [[retraction]]

$$
  id \;\colon\; F(c) \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}(c,c) \wedge F(c)
  \longrightarrow F(c)
$$

and so if all the preimages of a given subset of the coequalizer under these component maps is open, it must have already been open in $F(c)$.


=--


+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The statement of the [[co-Yoneda lemma]] in prop. \ref{TopologicalCoYonedaLemma} is a kind of [[categorification]] of the following statement in [[analysis]] (whence the notation with the integral signs):

For $X$ a [[topological space]], $f \colon X \to\mathbb{R}$ a [[continuous function]] and $\delta(-,x_0)$ denoting the [[Dirac distribution]], then

$$
  \int_{x \in X} \delta(x,x_0) f(x)
  = 
  f(x_0)
  \,.
$$

=--

It is this analogy that gives the name to the following statement:

+-- {: .num_prop #CoendsCommuteWithEachOther}
###### Proposition
**([[Fubini theorem]] for (co)-ends)**

For $F$ a pointed topologically enriched [[bifunctor]] on a small pointed topological [[product category]] $\mathcal{C}_1 \times \mathcal{C}_2$ (def. \ref{OppositeAndProductOfPointedTopologicallyEnrichedCategory}), i.e.

$$
   F 
  \;\colon\;
  \left(
    \mathcal{C}_1\times\mathcal{C}_2
  \right)^{op}
  \times
  (\mathcal{C}_1 \times\mathcal{C}_2)
  \longrightarrow
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
$$

then its [[end]] and [[coend]] (def. \ref{EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash}) is equivalently formed consecutively over each variable, in either order:

$$
  \overset{(c_1,c_2)}{\int} F((c_1,c_2), (c_1,c_2))
  \simeq
  \overset{c_1}{\int}
  \overset{c_2}{\int}
  F((c_1,c_2), (c_1,c_2))
  \simeq
  \overset{c_2}{\int}
  \overset{c_1}{\int}
  F((c_1,c_2), (c_1,c_2))
$$

and

$$
  \underset{(c_1,c_2)}{\int} F((c_1,c_2), (c_1,c_2))
  \simeq
  \underset{c_1}{\int}
  \underset{c_2}{\int}
  F((c_1,c_2), (c_1,c_2))
  \simeq
  \underset{c_2}{\int}
  \underset{c_1}{\int}
  F((c_1,c_2), (c_1,c_2))
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Because [[limits]] commute with limits, and [[colimits]] commute with colimits.

=--



+-- {: .num_remark #MappingSpacePreservesEnds}
###### Remark

Since the pointed compactly generated [[mapping space]] functor ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#PointedMappingSpace)) 

$$
  Maps(-,-)_\ast
  \;\colon\;
  \left(Top^{\ast/}_{cg}\right)^{op}
  \times
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
  \longrightarrow
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
$$

takes [[colimits]] in the first argument and [[limits]] in the second argument to limits ([cor.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#MappingSpacesSendsColimitsInFirstArgumentToLimits)), it in particular takes [[coends]] in the first argument and [[ends]] in the second argument, to ends (def. \ref{EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash}):

$$
  Maps( X, \; \int_{c} F(c,c))_\ast
  \simeq
  \int_c Maps(X, F(c,c)_\ast)
$$

and

$$
  Maps( \int^{c} F(c,c),\; Y  )_\ast
  \simeq
  \underset{c}{\int} Maps( F(c,c),\; Y )_\ast
  \,.
$$

=--

With this [[coend]] calculus in hand, there is an elegant proof of the defining [[universal property]] of the smash [[tensoring]] 

$$
  (-)\wedge(-)
   \;\colon\;
  [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
   \times
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
    \longrightarrow
  [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
$$

and the [[powering]] 

$$
  (-)^{(-)}
  \;\colon\;
  (Top^{\ast/}_{cg})^{op}
    \times
  [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
    \longrightarrow
  [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
$$

of [[topologically enriched functors]] $[\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast}_{cg}]$ ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TensoringAndPoweringOfTopologicallyEnrichedCopresheaves)). 

+-- {: .num_prop #UniversalPropertyOfTensoringAndPoweringOfFunctorsToTopcg}
###### Proposition

For $\mathcal{C}$ a pointed [[topologically enriched category]], there are [[natural isomorphisms]]

$$
  [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]( X \wedge K ,\, Y )
    \simeq
  Maps(K,\; [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](X,Y))_\ast
$$

and

$$
  [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](X,\, Y^K)
    \simeq
  Maps(K,\; [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](X,Y))
$$

for all $X,Y \in [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ and all $K \in Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Via the [[end]]-expression for $[\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](-,-)$ from def. \ref{PointedTopologicalFunctorCategory} and the fact (remark \ref{MappingSpacePreservesEnds}) that the pointed mapping space construction $Maps(-,-)_\ast$ preserves ends in the second variable, this reduces to the fact that $Maps(-,-)_\ast$ is the [[internal hom]] in the [[closed monoidal category]] $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ (example \ref{PointedTopologicalSpacesWithSmashIsSymmetricMonoidalCategory}) and hence satisfies the internal tensor/hom-adjunction isomorphism (prop. \ref{TensorHomAdjunctionIsoInternally}):

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](X \wedge K, Y)
    & =
    \underset{c}{\int}  
    Maps(
      (X \wedge K)(c),
      Y(c)
    )_\ast
    \\
    & \simeq
    \underset{c}{\int}
      Maps(X(c) \wedge K, Y(x))_\ast
    \\
    & \simeq
    \underset{c}{\int}
      Maps(K,Maps(X(c), Y(c))_\ast)_\ast
    \\
    & \simeq
    Maps(K, \underset{c}{\int} Maps(X(c),Y(c)))_\ast
    \\
    & = 
    Maps(K,[\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](X,Y))_\ast
  \end{aligned}
$$

and

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](X, Y^K)
    & =
    \underset{c}{\int}
      Maps(X(c), (Y^K)(c))_\ast
    \\
    & \simeq 
    \underset{c}{\int}
     Maps(X(c), Maps(K,Y(c))_\ast)_\ast
    \\
    & \simeq
    \underset{c}{\int} Maps(X(c) \wedge K, Y(c))_\ast
    \\
    & \simeq
    \underset{c}{\int} Maps(K, Maps(X(c),Y(c))_\ast)_\ast
    \\
    & \simeq
    Maps(K, \underset{c}{\int} Maps(X(c),Y(c))_\ast)_\ast
    \\
    & \simeq
    Maps(K, [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](X,Y))_\ast
    \,.
  \end{aligned}
$$

=--



+-- {: .num_prop #TopologicalLeftKanExtensionBCoend}
###### Proposition
**(left Kan extension via coends)**

Let $\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D}$ be [[small category|small]] pointed [[topologically enriched categories]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)) and let 

$$
  p \;\colon\; \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow \mathcal{D}
$$

be a pointed [[topologically enriched functor]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor)). Then precomposition with $p$ constitutes a functor

$$
  p^\ast 
  \;\colon\;
  [\mathcal{D}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
  \longrightarrow
  [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
$$

$G\mapsto G\circ p$. This functor has a [[left adjoint]] $Lan_p$, called **left [[Kan extension]]** along $p$

$$
  [\mathcal{D}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
    \underoverset
      {\underset{p^\ast}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\overset{Lan_p }{\longleftarrow}}
      {\bot}
  [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
$$

which is given objectwise by a [[coend]] (def. \ref{EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash}):

$$
  (Lan_p F)
  \;\colon\;
  c 
  \;\mapsto \;
  \overset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
   \mathcal{D}(p(c),d) \wedge F(c)
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Use the expression of natural transformations in terms of ends (example \ref{NaturalTransformationsViaEnds} and def. \ref{PointedTopologicalFunctorCategory}), then use the respect of $Maps(-,-)_\ast$ for ends/coends (remark \ref{MappingSpacePreservesEnds}),  use the smash/mapping space adjunction ([cor.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#SmashHomAdjunctionOnPointedCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpaces)), use the [[Fubini theorem]] (prop. \ref{CoendsCommuteWithEachOther}) and finally use [[Yoneda reduction]] (prop. \ref{YonedaReductionTopological}) to obtain a sequence of [[natural isomorphisms]] as follows:

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    [\mathcal{D},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]( Lan_p F, \, G )
    & =
   \underset{d \in \mathcal{D}}{\int}
    Maps( (Lan_p F)(d), \, G(d) )_\ast
   \\
   & =
   \underset{d\in \mathcal{D}}{\int}
   Maps\left(
     \overset{c \in \mathcal{C}}{\int} \mathcal{D}(p(c),d) \wedge F(c)
     ,\;
     G(d)
   \right)_\ast
    \\
  &\simeq
  \underset{d \in \mathcal{D}}{\int}
  \underset{c \in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
  Maps(
    \mathcal{D}(p(c),d)\wedge F(c) \,,\; G(d)
  )_\ast
  \\
  & \simeq
  \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
  \underset{d\in \mathcal{D}}{\int}
  Maps(F(c), 
    Maps(
     \mathcal{D}(p(c),d) , \, G(d)
    )_\ast
  )_\ast
  \\
  & \simeq
  \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
  Maps(F(c), 
   \underset{d\in \mathcal{D}}{\int}
   Maps(
    \mathcal{D}(p(c),d) , \, G(d)
   )_\ast
  )_\ast
  \\
  & \simeq
  \underset{c\in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
  Maps(F(c), G(p(c))
  )_\ast  
  \\
  & =
  [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](F,p^\ast G)
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

=--

##### Monoidal topological categories

We recall the basic definitions of [[monoidal categories]] and of [[monoid in a monoidal category|monoids]] and [[module object|modules]] [[internalization|internal]] to monoidal categories. All examples are at the end of this section, starting with example \ref{TopAsASymmetricMonoidalCategory} below.

+-- {: .num_defn #MonoidalCategory} 
###### Definition

A **(pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topologically enriched]] [[monoidal category]]** is a (pointed) [[topologically enriched category]] $\mathcal{C}$ ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)) equipped with 

1. a (pointed) [[topologically enriched functor]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor))

   $$ 
      \otimes 
        \;\colon\; 
      \mathcal{C} \times \mathcal{C}  
       \longrightarrow
      \mathcal{C}
   $$

   out of the (pointed) topologival [[product category]] of $\mathcal{C}$ with itself (def. \ref{OppositeAndProductOfPointedTopologicallyEnrichedCategory}), called the **[[tensor product]]**, 

1. an object

   $$ 
     1 \in \mathcal{C} 
   $$

   called the **[[unit object]]** or **[[tensor unit]]**, 

1. a [[natural isomorphism]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor))

   $$
     a 
       \;\colon\; 
     ((-)\otimes (-)) \otimes (-)
       \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
     (-) \otimes ((-)\otimes(-))
   $$

   called the **[[associator]]**, 

1. a [[natural isomorphism]] 

   $$
     \ell
       \;\colon\; 
     (1 \otimes (-)) 
       \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
     (-)
   $$

   called the **[[left unitor]]**, and a natural isomorphism 

   $$
     r \;\colon\; (-) \otimes 1 \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} (-)
   $$

   called the **[[right unitor]]**, 

such that the following two kinds of [[commuting diagram|diagrams commute]], for all objects involved:

1. **triangle identity**:

   $$
     \array{
        & (x \otimes 1) \otimes y &\stackrel{a_{x,1,y}}{\longrightarrow} & x \otimes (1 \otimes y)
         \\     
         & {}_{\rho_x \otimes 1_y}\searrow       
         && \swarrow_{1_x \otimes \lambda_y}
         & 
        \\
        &&
        x \otimes y
        &&
     }
   $$


1. the **[[pentagon identity]]**:

+-- {: style="text-align:center"}
[[!include monoidal category > pentagon]]
=--


=--


+-- {: .num_lemma #kel1} 
###### Lemma 
**([Kelly](monoidal+category#kel1))** 

Let $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ be a [[monoidal category]], def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}. Then the left and right [[unitors]] $\ell$ and $r$ satisfy the following conditions: 

1. $\ell_1 = r_1 \;\colon\; 1 \otimes 1 \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} 1$;

1. for all objects $x,y \in \mathcal{C}$ the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commutes]]:
 
   $$ 
     \array{
       (1 \otimes x) \otimes y  & & 
       \\
       {}^\mathllap{\alpha_{1, x, y}} \downarrow 
       & \searrow^\mathrlap{\ell_x y} & 
       \\
       1 \otimes (x \otimes y) 
       & \underset{\ell_{x \otimes y}}{\longrightarrow} & x \otimes y
     }
     \,.
   $$ 

   Analogously for the right unitor.

=-- 


+-- {: .num_defn #BraidedMonoidalCategory} 
###### Definition

A **(pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[braided monoidal category]]**, is a (pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[monoidal category]] $\mathcal{C}$ (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}) equipped with a [[natural isomorphism]]

$$ 
  \tau_{x,y} \colon x \otimes y \to y \otimes x 
$$

called the **[[braiding]]**, such that the following two kinds of [[commuting diagram|diagrams commute]] for all [[objects]] involved:

$$
  \array{
   (x \otimes y) \otimes z 
   &\stackrel{a_{x,y,z}}{\to}&
   x \otimes (y \otimes z)
   &\stackrel{\tau_{x,y \otimes z}}{\to}&
   (y \otimes z) \otimes x
   \\
   \downarrow^{\tau_{x,y}\otimes Id}
   &&&&
   \downarrow^{a_{y,z,x}}
   \\
   (y \otimes x) \otimes z
   &\stackrel{a_{y,x,z}}{\to}&
   y \otimes (x \otimes z)
   &\stackrel{Id \otimes \tau_{x,z}}{\to}&
   y \otimes (z \otimes x)
  }
$$

and

$$
  \array{
   x \otimes (y \otimes z) 
   &\stackrel{a^{-1}_{x,y,z}}{\to}&
   (x \otimes y) \otimes z
   &\stackrel{\tau_{x \otimes y, z}}{\to}&
   z \otimes (x \otimes y)
   \\
   \downarrow^{Id \otimes \tau_{y,z}}
   &&&&
   \downarrow^{a^{-1}_{z,x,y}}
   \\
   x \otimes (z \otimes y)
   &\stackrel{a^{-1}_{x,z,y}}{\to}&
   (x \otimes z) \otimes y
   &\stackrel{\tau_{x,z} \otimes Id}{\to}&
   (z \otimes x) \otimes y
  }
  \,,
$$

where $a_{x,y,z} \colon (x \otimes y) \otimes z \to x \otimes (y \otimes z)$ denotes the components of the [[associator]] of $\mathcal{C}^\otimes$. 

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #SymmetricMonoidalCategory} 
###### Definition

A **(pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[symmetric monoidal category]]** is a (pointed) topological [[braided monoidal category]] (def. \ref{BraidedMonoidalCategory}) for which the [[braiding]] 

$$ 
   \tau_{x,y} \colon x \otimes y \to y \otimes x 
$$

satisfies the condition:

$$ 
  \tau_{y,x} \circ \tau_{x,y} = 1_{x \otimes y}  
$$

for all objects $x, y$

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #ClosedMonoidalCategory}
###### Definition

Given a (pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[symmetric monoidal category]] $\mathcal{C}$ with [[tensor product]] $\otimes$ (def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory}) it is called a **[[closed monoidal category]]** if for each $Y \in \mathcal{C}$ the functor $Y \otimes(-)\simeq (-)\otimes X$ has a [[right adjoint]], denoted $hom(Y,-)$

$$
  \mathcal{C}
    \underoverset
      {\underset{hom(Y,-)}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\overset{(-) \otimes Y}{\longleftarrow}}
      {\bot}
  \mathcal{C}
  \,,
$$

hence if there are [[natural bijections]]

$$
  Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(X \otimes Y, Z)
   \;\simeq\;
  Hom_{\mathcal{C}}{C}(X, hom(Y,Z))
$$

for all objects $X,Z \in \mathcal{C}$. 

Since for the case that $X = 1$ is the [[tensor unit]] of $\mathcal{C}$ this means that

$$
  Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(1,hom(Y,Z)) \simeq Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(Y,Z)
  \,,
$$

the object $hom(Y,Z) \in \mathcal{C}$ is an enhancement of the ordinary [[hom-set]] $Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(Y,Z)$ to an object in $\mathcal{C}$.
Accordingly, it is also called the **[[internal hom]]** between $Y$ and $Z$. 

=--

In a [[closed monoidal category]], the adjunction isomorphism between [[tensor product]] and [[internal hom]] even holds internally:

+-- {: .num_prop #TensorHomAdjunctionIsoInternally}
###### Proposition

In a [[symmetric monoidal category|symmetric]] [[closed monoidal category]] (def. \ref{ClosedMonoidalCategory}) there are [[natural isomorphisms]]

$$
  hom(X \otimes Y, Z)
   \;\simeq\;
  hom(X, hom(Y,Z))
$$

whose image under $Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(1,-)$ are the defining [[natural bijections]] of def. \ref{ClosedMonoidalCategory}.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Let $A \in \mathcal{C}$ be any object. By applying the defining natural bijections twice, there are composite natural bijections

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(A , hom(X \otimes Y, Z))
    & \simeq
    Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(A \otimes (X \otimes Y), Z)
    \\
    & \simeq
    Hom_{\mathcal{C}}((A \otimes X)\otimes Y, Z)
    \\
    & \simeq
    Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(A \otimes X, hom(Y,Z))
    \\
    & \simeq
    Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(A, hom(X,hom(Y,Z)))
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Since this holds for all $A$, the [[Yoneda lemma]] (the [[fully faithful functor|fully faithfulness]] of the [[Yoneda embedding]]) says that there is an isomorphism $hom(X\otimes Y, Z) \simeq hom(X,hom(Y,Z))$. Moreover, by taking $A = 1$ in the above and using the left [[unitor]] isomorphisms $A \otimes (X \otimes Y) \simeq X \otimes Y$ and $A\otimes X \simeq X$  we get a [[commuting diagram]]

$$
  \array{
    Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(1,hom(X\otimes Y, ))
      &\overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}&
    Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(1,hom(X,hom(Y,Z)))
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\simeq}}\downarrow
      &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\simeq}}
    \\
    Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(X \otimes Y, Z)
     &\overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}&
    Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(X, hom(Y,Z))
  }
  \,.
$$

=--



+-- {: .num_example #TopAsASymmetricMonoidalCategory} 
###### Example

The category [[Set]] of [[sets]] and [[functions]] between them, regarded as enriched in [[discrete topological spaces]], becomes a [[symmetric monoidal category]] according to def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory} with [[tensor product]] the [[Cartesian product]] $\times$ of sets. The [[associator]], [[unitor]] and [[braiding]] isomorphism are the evident (almost unnoticable but nevertheless nontrivial) canonical identifications.

Similarly the $Top_{cg}$ of [[compactly generated topological spaces]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#kTop)) becomes a [[symmetric monoidal category]] with [[tensor product]] the corresponding [[Cartesian products]], hence the operation of forming k-ified ([cor.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#kTopIsCoreflectiveSubcategory)) [[product topological spaces]] ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ProductTopologicalSpace)). The underlying functions of the [[associator]], [[unitor]] and [[braiding]] isomorphisms are just those of the underlying sets, as above. 
 
Symmetric monoidal categories, such as these, for which the tensor product is the [[Cartesian product]] are called _[[Cartesian monoidal categories]]_.

Both examples are [[closed monoidal categories]] (def. \ref{ClosedMonoidalCategory}), with [[internal hom]] the [[mapping spaces]] ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#MappingTopologicalSpaceIsExponentialObject)).

=--

+-- {: .num_example #PointedTopologicalSpacesWithSmashIsSymmetricMonoidalCategory} 
###### Example

The category $Top_{cg}^{\ast/}$ of [[pointed topological space|pointed]] [[compactly generated topological spaces]] with [[tensor product]] the  [[smash product]] $\wedge$ ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#SmashProductOfPointedObjects)) 

$$
  X \wedge Y \coloneqq \frac{X\times Y}{X\vee Y}
$$

is a [[symmetric monoidal category]] (def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory}) with [[unit object]] the pointed [[0-sphere]] $S^0$.

The components of the [[associator]], the [[unitors]] and the [[braiding]] are those of [[Top]] as in example \ref{TopAsASymmetricMonoidalCategory}, descended to the [[quotient topological spaces]] which appear in the definition of the [[smash product]]). This works for pointed [[compactly generated spaces]] (but not for general pointed topological spaces) by [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#SmashProductInTopcgIsAssociative).

The category $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ is also a [[closed monoidal category]] (def. \ref{ClosedMonoidalCategory}), with [[internal hom]] the pointed [[mapping space]] $Maps(-,-)_\ast$ ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#PointedMappingSpace)) 

=--


+-- {: .num_example #ExampleAbelianGroupsOfMonoidalCategory}
###### Example

The category [[Ab]] of [[abelian groups]], regarded as enriched in [[discrete topological spaces]], becomes a [[symmetric monoidal category]] with tensor product the actual [[tensor product of abelian groups]] $\otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}$ and with [[tensor unit]] the additive group $\mathbb{Z}$ of [[integers]]. Again the [[associator]], [[unitor]] and [[braiding]] isomorphism are the evident ones coming from the underlying sets, as in example \ref{TopAsASymmetricMonoidalCategory}.

This is the archetypical case that motivates the notation "$\otimes$" for the pairing operation in a [[monoidal category]]: 

1. A [[monoid in a monoidal category|monoid in]] $(Ab, \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}, \mathbb{Z})$ (def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}) is equivalently a [[ring]]. 

1. A [[commutative monoid in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative monoid in]] in $(Ab, \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}, \mathbb{Z})$ (def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}) is equivalently a [[commutative ring]] $R$.

1. An $R$-[[module object]] in $(Ab, \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}, \mathbb{Z})$ (def. \ref{ModulesInMonoidalCategory}) is equivalently an $R$-[[module]];

1. The tensor product of $R$-module objects (def. \ref{TensorProductOfModulesOverCommutativeMonoidObject}) is the standard [[tensor product of modules]].

1. The [[category of modules|category of module objects]] $R Mod(Ab)$ (def. \ref{TensorProductOfModulesOverCommutativeMonoidObject}) is the standard [[category of modules]] $R Mod$.

=--


##### Algebras and modules
 {#AlgebrasAndModules}


+-- {: .num_defn #MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}
###### Definition

Given a (pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[monoidal category]] $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$, then a **[[monoid in a monoidal category|monoid internal to]]** $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ is

1. an [[object]] $A \in \mathcal{C}$;

1. a morphism $e \;\colon\; 1 \longrightarrow A$ (called the _[[unit]]_)

1. a morphism $\mu \;\colon\; A \otimes A \longrightarrow A$ (called the _product_); 

such that

1. ([[associativity]]) the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commutes]]

   $$
     \array{
       (A\otimes A) \otimes A 
         &\underoverset{\simeq}{a_{A,A,A}}{\longrightarrow}&
       A \otimes (A \otimes A)
         &\overset{A \otimes \mu}{\longrightarrow}&
       A \otimes A
       \\
       {}^{\mathllap{\mu \otimes A}}\downarrow  
         && &&
       \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu}}
       \\
       A \otimes A
         &\longrightarrow&
         &\overset{\mu}{\longrightarrow}&
       A
     }
     \,,
   $$

   where $a$ is the associator isomorphism of $\mathcal{C}$;

1. ([[unitality]]) the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commutes]]:

   $$
     \array{
       1 \otimes A 
         &\overset{e \otimes id}{\longrightarrow}&
       A \otimes A
         &\overset{id \otimes e}{\longleftarrow}& 
       A \otimes 1
       \\
       & {}_{\mathllap{\ell}}\searrow 
       & \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu}} &
       & \swarrow_{\mathrlap{r}}
       \\
       && A
     }
     \,,
   $$

   where $\ell$ and $r$ are the left and right unitor isomorphisms of $\mathcal{C}$.

Moreover, if $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes , 1)$ has the structure of a [[symmetric monoidal category]] (def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory}) $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1, B)$ with symmetric [[braiding]] $\tau$, then a monoid $(A,\mu, e)$ as above is called a **[[commutative monoid in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative monoid in]]** $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1, B)$ if in addition

* (commutativity) the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commutes]]

  $$
    \array{
      A \otimes A 
        && \underoverset{\simeq}{\tau_{A,A}}{\longrightarrow} &&
      A \otimes A
      \\
      & {}_{\mathllap{\mu}}\searrow && \swarrow_{\mathrlap{\mu}}
      \\
      && A
    }
    \,.
  $$

A [[homomorphism]] of monoids $(A_1, \mu_1, e_1)\longrightarrow (A_2, \mu_2, f_2)$ is a morphism

$$
  f \;\colon\; A_1 \longrightarrow A_2
$$ 

in $\mathcal{C}$, such that the following two [[commuting diagram|diagrams commute]]

$$
  \array{
    A_1 \otimes A_1 
      &\overset{f \otimes f}{\longrightarrow}&
    A_2 \otimes A_2
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\mu_1}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_2}}
    \\
    A_1 &\underset{f}{\longrightarrow}& A_2
  }
$$

and

$$
  \array{
    1_{\mathcal{c}} &\overset{e_1}{\longrightarrow}& A_1
    \\
    & {}_{\mathllap{e_2}}\searrow & \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f}}
    \\
    && A_2
  }
  \,.
$$

Write $Mon(\mathcal{C}, \otimes,1)$ for the [[category of monoids]] in $\mathcal{C}$, and $CMon(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ for its subcategory of commutative monoids.


=--

+-- {: .num_example #MonoidGivenByTensorUnit}
###### Example

Given a (pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[monoidal category]] $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$, then the [[tensor unit]] $1$ is a [[monoid in a monoidal category|monoid in]] $\mathcal{C}$ (def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}) with product given by either the left or right [[unitor]]

$$
  \ell_1 = r_1 \;\colon\; 1 \otimes 1 \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} 1
  \,.
$$

By lemma \ref{kel1}, these two morphisms coincide and define an [[associativity|associative]] product with unit the identity $id \colon 1 \to 1$.

If $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes , 1)$ is a [[symmetric monoidal category]] (def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory}), then this monoid is a [[commutative monoid in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative monoid]].

=--


+-- {: .num_defn #ModulesInMonoidalCategory}
###### Definition

Given a (pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[monoidal category]] $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}), and given $(A,\mu,e)$ a [[monoid in a monoidal category|monoid in]] $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ (def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}), then a **left [[module object]]** in $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ over $(A,\mu,e)$ is

1. an [[object]] $N \in \mathcal{C}$;

1. a [[morphism]] $\rho \;\colon\; A \otimes N \longrightarrow N$ (called the _[[action]]_);

such that 

1. ([[unitality]]) the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commutes]]:

   $$
     \array{
       1 \otimes N 
         &\overset{e \otimes id}{\longrightarrow}&
       A \otimes N
       \\
       & {}_{\mathllap{\ell}}\searrow 
       & \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\rho}} 
       \\
       && A
     }
     \,,
   $$

   where $\ell$ is the left unitor isomorphism of $\mathcal{C}$.


1. (action property) the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commutes]]

   $$
     \array{
       (A\otimes A) \otimes N
         &\underoverset{\simeq}{a_{A,A,N}}{\longrightarrow}&
       A \otimes (A \otimes N)
         &\overset{A \otimes \rho}{\longrightarrow}&
       A \otimes N
       \\
       {}^{\mathllap{\mu \otimes N}}\downarrow  
         && &&
       \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\rho}}
       \\
       A \otimes N
         &\longrightarrow&
         &\overset{\rho}{\longrightarrow}&
       N
     }
     \,,
   $$

A [[homomorphism]] of left $A$-module objects 

$$
  (N_1, \rho_1) \longrightarrow (N_2, \rho_2)
$$

is a morphism 

$$
  f\;\colon\; N_1 \longrightarrow N_2
$$

in $\mathcal{C}$, such that the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commutes]]:

$$
  \array{
    A\otimes N_1 &\overset{A \otimes f}{\longrightarrow}& A\otimes N_2
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\rho_1}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\rho_2}}
    \\
    N_1 &\underset{f}{\longrightarrow}& N_2
  }
  \,.
$$

For the resulting **[[category of modules]]** of left $A$-modules in $\mathcal{C}$ with $A$-module homomorphisms between them, we write

$$
  A Mod(\mathcal{C})
  \,.
$$

This is naturally a (pointed) [[topologically enriched category]] itself.

=--

+-- {: .num_example #EveryObjectIsModuleOverTensorUnit}
###### Example

Given a [[monoidal category]] $(\mathcal{C},\otimes, 1)$ (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}) with the [[tensor unit]] $1$ regarded as a [[monoid in a monoidal category]] via example \ref{MonoidGivenByTensorUnit}, then the left [[unitor]]

$$
  \ell_C 
    \;\colon\;
  1\otimes C \longrightarrow C
$$

makes every object $C \in \mathcal{C}$ into a left module, according to def. \ref{ModulesInMonoidalCategory}, over $C$. The action property holds due to lemma \ref{kel1}. This gives an [[equivalence of categories]]

$$
  \mathbb{C} \simeq 1 Mod(\mathcal{C})
$$

of $\mathcal{C}$ with the [[category of modules]] over its tensor unit.


=--


+-- {: .num_prop #MonoidModuleOverItself} 
###### Proposition

In the situation of def. \ref{ModulesInMonoidalCategory}, the monoid $(A,\mu, e)$ canonically becomes a left module over itself by setting $\rho \coloneqq \mu$. More generally, for $C \in \mathcal{C}$ any object, then $A \otimes C$ naturally becomes a left $A$-module by setting:

$$
  \rho
  \;\colon\;
  A \otimes (A \otimes C)
   \underoverset{\simeq}{a^{-1}_{A,A,C}}{\longrightarrow}
  (A \otimes A) \otimes C
    \overset{\mu \otimes id}{\longrightarrow}
  A \otimes C
  \,.
$$

The $A$-modules of this form are called **[[free modules]]**.

The [[free functor]] $F$ constructing free $A$-modules is [[left adjoint]] to the [[forgetful functor]] $U$ which sends a module $(N,\rho)$ to the underlying object $U(N,\rho) \coloneqq N$.

$$
  A Mod(\mathcal{C})
    \underoverset
     {\underset{U}{\longrightarrow}}
     {\overset{F}{\longleftarrow}}
     {\bot}
  \mathcal{C}
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

A homomorphism out of a free $A$-module is a morphism in $\mathcal{C}$ of the form

$$
  f \;\colon\; A\otimes C \longrightarrow N
$$

fitting into the diagram (where we are notationally suppressing the [[associator]])

$$
  \array{
    A \otimes A \otimes C
      &\overset{A \otimes f}{\longrightarrow}&
    A \otimes N
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\mu \otimes id}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\rho}}
    \\
    A \otimes C
      &\underset{f}{\longrightarrow}&
    N
  }
  \,.
$$

Consider the composite

$$
  \tilde f
    \;\colon\;
  C
    \underoverset{\simeq}{\ell_C}{\longrightarrow}
  1 \otimes C
    \overset{e\otimes id}{\longrightarrow}
  A \otimes C
    \overset{f}{\longrightarrow}
  N
  \,,
$$

i.e. the restriction of $f$ to the unit "in" $A$. By definition, this fits into a [[commuting square]] of the form (where we are now notationally suppressing the [[associator]] and the [[unitor]])

$$
  \array{
   A \otimes C
     &\overset{id \otimes \tilde f}{\longrightarrow}&
   A \otimes N
   \\
   {}^{\mathllap{id \otimes e \otimes id}}\downarrow 
     && 
   \downarrow^{\mathrlap{=}}
   \\
   A \otimes A \otimes C
    &\underset{id \otimes f}{\longrightarrow}&
   A \otimes N
  }
  \,.
$$

Pasting this square onto the top of the previous one yields

$$
  \array{
   A \otimes C
     &\overset{id \otimes \tilde f}{\longrightarrow}&
   A \otimes N
   \\
   {}^{\mathllap{id \otimes e \otimes id}}\downarrow 
     && 
   \downarrow^{\mathrlap{=}}
    \\
    A \otimes A \otimes C
      &\overset{A \otimes f}{\longrightarrow}&
    A \otimes N
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\mu \otimes id}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\rho}}
    \\
    A \otimes C
      &\underset{f}{\longrightarrow}&
    N
  }
  \,,
$$

where now the left vertical composite is the identity, by the unit law in $A$. This shows that $f$ is uniquely determined by $\tilde f$ via the relation

$$
  f = \rho \circ (id_A \otimes \tilde f)
  \,.
$$

This natural bijection between $f$ and $\tilde f$ establishes the adjunction.


=--

+-- {: .num_defn #TensorProductOfModulesOverCommutativeMonoidObject}
###### Definition

Given a (pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[closed monoidal category]] [[symmetric monoidal category]] $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ (def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory}, def. \ref{ClosedMonoidalCategory}), given $(A,\mu,e)$ a [[commutative monoid in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative monoid in]] $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ (def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}), and given $(N_1, \rho_1)$ and $(N_2, \rho_2)$ two left $A$-[[module objects]] (def.\ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}), then 

1. the **[[tensor product of modules]]** $N_1 \otimes_A N_2$ is, if it exists, the [[coequalizer]]

   $$
     N_1 \otimes A \otimes N_2
     \underoverset
       {\underset{\rho_{1}\circ (\tau_{N_1,A} \otimes N_2)}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\overset{N_1 \otimes \rho_2}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\phantom{AAAA}}
     N_1 \otimes N_1
       \overset{coequ}{\longrightarrow}
     N_1 \otimes_A N_2
   $$

   and if $A \otimes (-)$ preserves these coequalizers, then this is equipped with the left $A$-action induced from the left $A$-action on $N_1$

1. the **function module** $hom_A(N_1,N_2)$ is, if it exists, the [[equalizer]]

   $$
     hom_A(N_1, N_2)
       \overset{equ}{\longrightarrow}
     hom(N_1, N_2)
       \underoverset
         {\underset{hom(A \otimes N_1, \rho_2)\circ (A \otimes(-))}{\longrightarrow}}
         {\overset{hom(\rho_1,N_2)}{\longrightarrow}}
         {\phantom{AAAAAA}}
       hom(A \otimes N_1, N_2)
     \,.
   $$

   equipped with the left $A$-action that is induced by the left $A$-action on $N_2$.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #MonoidalCategoryOfModules}
###### Proposition

Given a (pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[closed monoidal category|closed]] [[symmetric monoidal category]] $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ (def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory}, def. \ref{ClosedMonoidalCategory}), and given $(A,\mu,e)$ a [[commutative monoid in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative monoid in]] $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ (def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}). If all [[coequalizers]] exist in $\mathcal{C}$ and if $A \otimes (-)$ preserves coequalizers, then the [[tensor product of modules]] $\otimes_A$ from def. \ref{TensorProductOfModulesOverCommutativeMonoidObject} makes the [[category of modules]] $A Mod(\mathcal{C})$ into a [[symmetric monoidal category]], $(A Mod, \otimes_A, A)$ with [[tensor unit]] the object $A$ itself, regarded as an $A$-module via prop. \ref{MonoidModuleOverItself}.

If moreover all [[equalizers]] exist, then this is a [[closed monoidal category]] (def. \ref{ClosedMonoidalCategory}) with [[internal hom]] given by the function modules $hom_A$ of def. \ref{TensorProductOfModulesOverCommutativeMonoidObject}.

=--

(e.g. [Hovey-Shipley-Smith 00, lemma 2.2.2, lemma 2.2.8](#HoveyShipleySmith00))


+-- {: .num_defn #AAlgebra}
###### Definition

Given a [[monoidal category|monoidal]] [[category of modules]] $(A Mod , \otimes_A , A)$ as in prop. \ref{MonoidalCategoryOfModules}, then a [[monoid in a monoidal category|monoid]] $(E, \mu, e)$ in  $(A Mod , \otimes_A , A)$ (def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}) is called an **$A$-[[associative algebra|algebra]]**.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #AlgebrasOverAAreMonoidsUnderA}
###### Propposition

Given a [[monoidal category|monoidal]] [[category of modules]] $(A Mod , \otimes_A , A)$ in a [[monoidal category]] $(\mathcal{C},\otimes, 1)$ as in prop. \ref{MonoidalCategoryOfModules}, and an $A$-algebra $(E,\mu,e)$ (def. \ref{AAlgebra}), then there is an [[equivalence of categories]]

$$
  A Alg_{comm}(\mathcal{C}) 
    \coloneqq 
  CMon(A Mod)
   \simeq
  CMon(\mathcal{C})^{A/}
$$

between the [[category of commutative monoids]] in $A Mod$ and the [[coslice category]] of commutative monoids in $\mathcal{C}$ under $A$, hence between commutative $A$-algebras in $\mathcal{C}$ and commutative monoids $E$ in $\mathcal{C}$ that are equipped with a homomorphism of monoids $A \longrightarrow E$.

=--

(e.g. [EKMM 97, VII lemma 1.3](#EKMM97))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

In one direction, consider a $A$-algebra $E$ with unit $e_E \;\colon\; A \longrightarrow E$ and product $\mu_{E/A} \colon E \otimes_A E \longrightarrow E$. There is the underlying product $\mu_E$ 

$$
  \array{
    E \otimes A \otimes E
    & 
    \underoverset
      {\underset{}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\overset{}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\phantom{AAA}}
    &
    E \otimes E
     &\overset{coeq}{\longrightarrow}&
    E \otimes_A E
    \\
    && & {}_{\mathllap{\mu_E}}\searrow & \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_{E/A}}}
    \\
    && && E
  }
  \,.
$$

By considering a diagram of such coequalizer diagrams with middle vertical morphism $e_E\circ e_A$, one find that this is a unit for $\mu_E$ and that $(E, \mu_E, e_E \circ e_A)$ is a commutative monoid in $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$.

Then consider the two conditions on the unit $e_E \colon A \longrightarrow E$. First of all this is an $A$-module homomorphism, which means that

$$
  (\star)
  \;\;\;\;\;
  \;\;\;\;\;
  \array{
    A \otimes A &\overset{id \otimes e_E}{\longrightarrow}& A \otimes E
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\mu_A}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\rho}}
    \\
    A &\underset{e_E}{\longrightarrow}& E
  }
$$

[[commuting diagram|commutes]]. Moreover it satisfies the unit property

$$
  \array{
    A \otimes_A E 
      &\overset{e_A \otimes id}{\longrightarrow}&
    E \otimes_A E
    \\
    & {}_{\mathllap{\simeq}}\searrow & \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_{E/A}}}
    \\
    && E
  }
  \,.
$$

By forgetting the tensor product over $A$, the latter gives

$$
  \array{
    A \otimes E 
      &\overset{e \otimes id}{\longrightarrow}&
    E \otimes E
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{}}
    \\
    A \otimes_A E 
      &\overset{e_E \otimes id}{\longrightarrow}&
    E \otimes_A E
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\simeq}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_{E/A}}}
    \\
    E &=& E
  }
  \;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;
   \simeq
  \;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;
  \array{
    A \otimes E 
      &\overset{e_E \otimes id}{\longrightarrow}&
    E \otimes E
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\rho}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_{E}}}
    \\
    E &\underset{id}{\longrightarrow}& E  
  }
  \,,
$$

where the top vertical morphisms on the left the canonical coequalizers, which identifies the vertical composites on the right as shown. Hence this may be [[pasting|pasted]] to the square $(\star)$ above, to yield a [[commuting square]]

$$
  \array{
    A \otimes A
     &\overset{id\otimes e_E}{\longrightarrow}&
    A \otimes E 
      &\overset{e_E \otimes id}{\longrightarrow}&
    E \otimes E
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\mu_A}}\downarrow
      &&
    {}^{\mathllap{\rho}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_{E}}}
    \\
    A &\underset{e_E}{\longrightarrow}& E &\underset{id}{\longrightarrow}& E  
  }  
  \;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;
   =
  \;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;
  \array{
    A \otimes A 
     &\overset{e_E \otimes e_E}{\longrightarrow}&
    E \otimes E
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\mu_A}}\downarrow
      &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_E}}
    \\
    A &\underset{e_E}{\longrightarrow}& E
  }
  \,.
$$

This shows that the unit $e_A$ is a homomorphism of monoids $(A,\mu_A, e_A) \longrightarrow (E, \mu_E, e_E\circ e_A)$.

Now for the converse direction, assume that $(A,\mu_A, e_A)$ and $(E, \mu_E, e'_E)$ are two commutative monoids in $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ with $e_E \;\colon\; A  \to E$ a monoid homomorphism. Then $E$ inherits a left $A$-[[module]] structure by

$$
  \rho
    \;\colon\;
  A \otimes E 
    \overset{e_A \otimes id}{\longrightarrow} 
  E \otimes E
    \overset{\mu_E}{\longrightarrow}
  E
  \,.
$$

By commutativity and associativity it follows that $\mu_E$ coequalizes the two induced morphisms $E \otimes A \otimes E \underoverset{\longrightarrow}{\longrightarrow}{\phantom{AA}} E \otimes E$. Hence the [[universal property]] of the [[coequalizer]] gives a factorization through some $\mu_{E/A}\colon E \otimes_A E \longrightarrow E$. This shows that $(E, \mu_{E/A}, e_E)$ is a commutative $A$-algebra.

Finally one checks that these two constructions are inverses to each other, up to isomorphism.

=--

##### Topological Day convolution



+-- {: .num_defn #TopologicalDayConvolutionProduct}
###### Definition

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[small category|small]] pointed [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[monoidal category]] (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}) with [[tensor product]] denoted $\otimes_{\mathcal{C}} \;\colon\; \mathcal{C} \times\mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{C}$. 

Then the **[[Day convolution]] tensor product** on the pointed topological [[enriched functor category]] $[\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ (def. \ref{PointedTopologicalFunctorCategory}) is the [[functor]]

$$
  \otimes_{Day} 
    \;\colon\; 
  [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}] \times [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}] 
    \longrightarrow 
  [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
$$

out of the pointed topological [[product category]] (def. \ref{OppositeAndProductOfPointedTopologicallyEnrichedCategory}) given by the following [[coend]] (def. \ref{EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash})

$$
  X \otimes_{Day} Y
    \;\colon\;
  c 
    \;\mapsto\;
  \overset{(c_1,c_2)\in \mathcal{C}\times \mathcal{C}}{\int}
    \mathcal{C}(c_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_2, c) \wedge X(c_1) \wedge Y(c_2)
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

Let $Seq$ denote the category with objects the [[natural numbers]], and only the [[zero morphisms]] and [[identity morphisms]] on these objects:

$$
  Seq(n_1,n_2)
  \coloneqq
  \left\{
    \array{
      S^0 & if\; n_1 = n_2
      \\
      \ast & otherwise
    }
  \right.
  \,.
$$

Regard this as a pointed topologically enriched category in the unique way. The operation of addition of natural numbers $\otimes = +$ makes this a monoidal category.

An object $X_\bullet \in [Seq, Top_{cg}^{\ast/}]$ is an $\mathbb{N}$-sequence of pointed topological spaces. Given two such, then their Day convolution according to def. \ref{TopologicalDayConvolutionProduct} is

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    (X \otimes_{Day} Y)_n
    & =
    \overset{(n_1,n_2)}{\int}
     Seq(n_1 + n_2 , n)
     \wedge 
     X_{n_1} \wedge X_{n_2}
    \\
    & = \underset{{n_1+n_2} \atop {= n}}{\coprod} \left(X_{n_1}\wedge X_{n_2}\right)
  \end{aligned} 
  \,.
$$

=--


We observe now that [[Day convolution]] is equivalently a [[left Kan extension]] (def. \ref{TopologicalLeftKanExtensionBCoend}). This will be key for understanding [[monoids]] and [[modules]] with respect to Day convolution.

+-- {: .num_defn #ExternalTensorProduct}
###### Definition

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[small category|small]] pointed [[topologically enriched category]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)).  Its **[[external tensor product]]** is the pointed [[topologically enriched functor]]

$$
  \overline{\wedge} 
   \;\colon\; 
  [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}] 
    \times 
  [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}] 
    \longrightarrow 
  [\mathcal{C}\times \mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
$$

given by 

$$
  X \overline{\wedge} Y  
    \;\coloneqq\; 
  \wedge \circ (X,Y)
  \,,
$$

i.e.

$$
  (X \overline\wedge Y)(c_1,c_2)
  =
  X(c_1)\wedge X(c_2)
  \,.
$$

=--


+-- {: .num_prop #DayConvolutionViaKanExtensionOfExternalTensorAlongTensor}
###### Proposition

The [[Day convolution]] product (def. \ref{TopologicalDayConvolutionProduct}) of two functors is equivalently the [[left Kan extension]] (def. \ref{TopologicalLeftKanExtensionBCoend}) of their external tensor product (def. \ref{ExternalTensorProduct}) along the tensor product $\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}$: there is a [[natural isomorphism]]

$$
  X \otimes_{Day} Y
  \simeq
  Lan_{\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}} (X \overline{\wedge} Y)
  \,.
$$

Hence the [[adjunction unit]] is a [[natural transformation]] of the form

$$
  \array{
    \mathcal{C} \times \mathcal{C}
    &&
      \overset{X \overline{\wedge} Y}{\longrightarrow}
    &&
      Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
    \\
    & {}^{\mathllap{\otimes}}\searrow 
     &\Downarrow&
    \nearrow_{\mathrlap{X \otimes_{Day} Y}}
    \\
    && \mathcal{C}
  }
  \,.
$$

=--

This perspective is highlighted in ([MMSS 00, p. 60](#MMSS00)).

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By prop. \ref{TopologicalLeftKanExtensionBCoend} we may compute the left Kan extension as the following [[coend]]:

$$
  \begin{aligned}
     Lan_{\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}} (X\overline{\wedge} Y)(c)
     &
     \simeq
      \overset{(c_1,c_2)}{\int} 
      \mathcal{C}(c_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_2, c )
      \wedge
      (X\overline{\wedge}Y)(c_1,c_2)
     \\
    & =
    \overset{(c_1,c_2)}{\int}
    \mathcal{C}(c_1\otimes c_2) 
    \wedge
     X(c_1)\wedge X(c_2) 
  \end{aligned} 
  \,.
$$


=--

+-- {: .num_cor #DayConvolutionViaNaturalIsosInvolvingExternalTensorAndTensor}
###### Corollary

The [[Day convolution]] $\otimes_{Day}$ (def. \ref{TopologicalDayConvolutionProduct}) is universally characterized by the property that there are [[natural isomorphisms]]

$$
  [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](X \otimes_{Day} Y, Z) 
    \simeq 
  [\mathcal{C}\times \mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](
    X \overline{\wedge} Y,\; Z \circ \wedge
  )
  \,,
$$

where $\overline{\wedge}$ is the external product of def. \ref{ExternalTensorProduct}.

=--


Write

$$
  y \;\colon\; \mathcal{C}^{op} \longrightarrow [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
$$

for the $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$-[[Yoneda embedding]], so that for $c\in \mathcal{C}$ any [[object]], $y(c)$ is the [[representable functor|corepresented functor]] $y(c)\colon d \mapsto \mathcal{C}(c,d)$.


+-- {: .num_prop #DayConvolutionYieldsMonoidalCategoryStructure}
###### Proposition

For $\mathcal{C}$ a [[small category|small]] pointed [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[monoidal category]] (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}), the [[Day convolution]] tensor product $\otimes_{Day}$ of def. \ref{TopologicalDayConvolutionProduct} makes the pointed topologically [[enriched functor category]]

$$
  ( [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1))
$$

into a pointed topological [[monoidal category]] (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}) with [[tensor unit]] $y(1)$ [[representable functor|co-represented]] by the tensor unit $1$ of $\mathcal{C}$. 

Moreover, if $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, 1)$ is equipped with a [[braiding]] $\tau^{\mathcal{C}}$ (def. \ref{BraidedMonoidalCategory}), then $( [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1))$ becomes itself a [[braided monoidal category]] with braiding given by

$$
  \array{
    (X \otimes_{Day} Y)(c)
    & = &
    \overset{c_1,c_2}{\int} 
     \mathcal{C}(c_1 \otimes c_2) \wedge X(c_1) \wedge Y(c_2)
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\tau}_{X,Y}(c)}\downarrow
    &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\overset{c_1,c_2}{\int} \mathcal{C}(\tau^{\mathcal{C}}_{c_1,c_2}, c  ) \wedge \tau^{Top^{\ast/}}_{X(c(1)), X(c_2)}  }}
    \\
    (Y \otimes_{Day} X)(c)
    & = &
    \overset{c_1,c_2}{\int} 
     \mathcal{C}(c_2 \otimes c_1) \wedge Y(c_2) \wedge X(c_1)   
  }
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Regarding [[associativity]], observe that

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    (X \otimes_{Day} ( Y \otimes_{Day} Z ))(c)
    & \simeq
    \overset{(c_1,c_2)}{\int}
      \mathcal{C}(c_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} c_2, \,c) 
        \wedge
      X(c_1) 
       \wedge
      \overset{(d_1,d_2)}{\int}
       \mathcal{C}(d_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} d_2, c_2 )
       (Y(d_2) \wedge Z(d_2))
    \\
    &\simeq \overset{c_1, d_1, d_2}{\int}
    \underset{\simeq \mathcal{C}(c_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} d_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} d_2, c )}{
      \underbrace{
       \overset{c_2}{\int} 
         \mathcal{C}(c_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} c_2 , c)
           \wedge
         \mathcal{C}(d_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}}d_2, c_2 )
      }
    }
    \wedge X(c_1) \wedge (Y(d_1) \wedge Z(d_2))
    \\
    &\simeq 
    \overset{c_1, d_1, d_2}{\int}
     \mathcal{C}(c_1\otimes_{\mathcal{C}} d_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} d_2, c ) 
       \wedge  
     X(c_1) \wedge (Y(d_1) \wedge Z(d_2))
  \end{aligned}
  \,,
$$

where we used the [[Fubini theorem]] for [[coends]] (prop. \ref{CoendsCommuteWithEachOther}) and then twice the [[co-Yoneda lemma]] (prop. \ref{TopologicalCoYonedaLemma}). An analogous formula follows for $X \otimes_{Day}  (Y \otimes_{Day} Z)))(c)$, and so associativity follows via prop. \ref{DayConvolutionViaKanExtensionOfExternalTensorAlongTensor} from the associativity of the [[smash product]] and of the tensor product $\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}$.

Similarly, if $\mathcal{C}$ is braided then the hexagon identity for the [[braiding]] follows, under the coend, from the hexagon identities for the braidings in $\mathcal{C}$ and $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$.

To see that $y(1)$ is the tensor unit for $\otimes_{Day}$, 
use the [[Fubini theorem]] for [[coends]] (prop. \ref{CoendsCommuteWithEachOther}) and then twice the [[co-Yoneda lemma]] (prop. \ref{TopologicalCoYonedaLemma}) to get for any $X \in [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ that

$$
  \begin{aligned}
     X \otimes_{Day} y(1)
     & 
     =
     \overset{c_1,c_2 \in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
     \mathcal{C}(c_1\otimes_{\mathcal{D}} c_2,-) 
      \wedge 
     X(c_1) \wedge \mathcal{C}(1,c_2)
     \\
     & \simeq 
     \overset{c_1\in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
      X(c_1) 
        \wedge  
      \overset{c_2 \in \mathcal{C}}{\int}  
        \mathcal{C}(c_1\otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_2,-)
        \wedge 
        \mathcal{C}(1,c_2) 
    \\
    & \simeq 
      \overset{c_1\in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
      X(c_1) 
         \wedge
      \mathcal{C}(c_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} 1, -)
    \\
    & \simeq 
      \overset{c_1\in \mathcal{C}}{\int}
      X(c_1) 
         \wedge
      \mathcal{C}(c_1, -)
    \\
    & \simeq
    X(-)
    \\
    & \simeq 
    X
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

=--


+-- {: .num_prop #DayMonoidalStructureIsClosed}
###### Proposition

For $\mathcal{C}$ a [[small category|small]] pointed [[topologically enriched category|topological]] [[monoidal category]] (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}) with [[tensor product]] denoted $\otimes_{\mathcal{C}} \;\colon\; \mathcal{C} \times\mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{C}$, the [[monoidal category]] with [[Day convolution]] $([\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1))$ from def. \ref{DayConvolutionYieldsMonoidalCategoryStructure} is a [[closed monoidal category]] (def. \ref{ClosedMonoidalCategory}). Its [[internal hom]] $[-,-]_{Day}$ is given by the [[end]] (def. \ref{EndAndCoendInTopcgSmash})

$$
  [X,Y]_{Day}(c)
  \simeq
   \underset{c_1,c_2}{\int}
      Maps\left( 
        \mathcal{C}(c \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_1,c_2),
        \;
        Maps(X(c_1) ,  Y(c_2))_\ast 
      \right)_\ast       
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Using the [[Fubini theorem]] (def. \ref{CoendsCommuteWithEachOther}) and the [[co-Yoneda lemma]] (def. \ref{TopologicalCoYonedaLemma}) and in view of definition \ref{PointedTopologicalFunctorCategory} of the [[enriched functor category]], there is the following sequence of [[natural isomorphisms]]:

$$
  \begin{aligned}
     [\mathcal{C},V]( X, [Y,Z]_{Day} )
       & \simeq
     \underset{c}{\int} 
     Maps\left(
        X(c), 
        \underset{c_1,c_2}{\int}
        Maps\left( 
          \mathcal{C}(c \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_1 , c_2),
          Maps(Y(c_1), Z(c_2))_\ast 
        \right)_\ast
     \right)_\ast
     \\
     &
     \simeq
     \underset{c}{\int}
     \underset{c_1,c_2}{\int}
     Maps\left(
       \mathcal{C}(c \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_1, c_2)
         \wedge
       X(c)
         \wedge
       Y(c_1)
       ,\;
       Z(c_2)
     \right)_\ast
     \\
     & \simeq
     \underset{c_2}{\int}
     Maps\left(
       \overset{c,c_1}{\int}
       \mathcal{C}(c \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_1, c_2)
         \wedge
       X(c)
         \wedge 
       Y(c_1)
       ,\;
       Z(c_2)
     \right)_\ast
     \\
     &\simeq
     \underset{c_2}{\int}
       Maps\left(
         (X \otimes_{Day} Y)(c_2),
         Z(c_2)
       \right)_\ast
     \\
     &\simeq
     [\mathcal{C},V](X \otimes_{Day} Y, Z)
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

=--


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

In the situation of def. \ref{DayConvolutionYieldsMonoidalCategoryStructure}, the [[Yoneda embedding]] $c\mapsto \mathcal{C}(c,-)$  constitutes a  [[strong monoidal functor]] (def. \ref{LaxMonoidalFunctor})

$$
  (\mathcal{C},\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}, I) \hookrightarrow ([\mathcal{C},V], \otimes_{Day}, y(I))
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

That the [[tensor unit]] is respected is part of prop. \ref{DayConvolutionYieldsMonoidalCategoryStructure}. To see that the [[tensor product]] is respected, apply the [[co-Yoneda lemma]] (prop \ref{TopologicalCoYonedaLemma}) twice to get the following natural isomorphism

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    (y(c_1) \otimes_{Day} y(c_2))(c)
    &
    \simeq
    \overset{d_1, d_2}{\int} 
      \mathcal{C}(d_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} d_2, c )
    \wedge
      \mathcal{C}(c_1,d_1)
    \wedge
      \mathcal{C}(c_2,d_2)
    \\
    & \simeq \mathcal{C}(c_1\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}c_2 , c )
    \\
    & 
    = y(c_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_2 )(c)
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

=--



##### Functors with smash product
 {#FunctorsWithSmashProduct}


+-- {: .num_defn #LaxMonoidalFunctor}
###### Definition

Let $(\mathcal{C},\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}, 1_{\mathcal{C}})$ and $(\mathcal{D},\otimes_{\mathcal{D}}, 1_{\mathcal{D}} )$ be two (pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topologically enriched]] [[monoidal categories]] (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}). A topologically enriched **lax monoidal functor** between them is

1. a [[topologically enriched functor]] 

   $$
     F \;\colon\; \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow \mathcal{D}
     \,,
   $$

1. a morphism

   $$
     \epsilon \;\colon\; 1_{\mathcal{D}} \longrightarrow F(1_{\mathcal{C}})
   $$  

1. a [[natural transformation]]

   $$
     \mu_{x,y} 
       \;\colon\; 
     F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F(y) 
       \longrightarrow 
     F(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y)
   $$

   for all $x,y \in \mathcal{C}$

satisfying the following conditions:

1. **([[associativity]])** For all objects $x,y,z \in \mathcal{C}$ the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commutes]]

   $$
     \array{
       (F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F(y)) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F(z)
         &\underoverset{\simeq}{a^{\mathcal{D}}_{F(x),F(y),F(z)}}{\longrightarrow}&
       F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}}( F(y)\otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F(z) )
       \\
       {}^{\mathllap{\mu_{x,y} \otimes id}}\downarrow 
         && 
       \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id\otimes \mu_{y,z}}}
       \\
       F(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F(z)
        &&
       F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} ( F(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y) )
       \\
       {}^{\mathllap{\mu_{x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y , z} } }\downarrow 
         && 
       \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_{ x, y \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} z  }}}
       \\
       F( ( x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y ) \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} z  )
         &\underset{F(a^{\mathcal{C}}_{x,y,z})}{\longrightarrow}&
       F( x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} ( y \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} z ) )
     }
     \,,
   $$

   where $a^{\mathcal{C}}$ and $a^{\mathcal{D}}$ denote the [[associators]] of the monoidal categories;


1. **([[unitality]])** For all $x \in \mathcal{C}$ the following [[commuting diagram|diagrams commutes]]

   $$
     \array{
       1_{\mathcal{D}} \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F(x)
         &\overset{\epsilon \otimes id}{\longrightarrow}&
       F(1_{\mathcal{C}}) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F(x)
       \\
       {}^{\mathllap{\ell^{\mathcal{D}}_{F(x)}}}\downarrow 
         && 
       \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_{1_{\mathcal{C}}, x }}}
       \\
       F(x) 
         &\overset{F(\ell^{\mathcal{C}}_x )}{\longleftarrow}&
       F(1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} x  )
     }
   $$

   and  

   $$
     \array{
       F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}}  1_{\mathcal{D}}
         &\overset{id \otimes \epsilon }{\longrightarrow}&
       F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}}  F(1_{\mathcal{C}}) 
       \\
       {}^{\mathllap{r^{\mathcal{D}}_{F(x)}}}\downarrow 
         && 
       \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_{x, 1_{\mathcal{C}} }}}
       \\
       F(x) 
         &\overset{F(r^{\mathcal{C}}_x )}{\longleftarrow}&
       F(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} 1  )
     }
     \,,
   $$

   where $\ell^{\mathcal{C}}$, $\ell^{\mathcal{D}}$, $r^{\mathcal{C}}$, $r^{\mathcal{D}}$ denote the left and right [[unitors]] of the two monoidal categories, respectively.

If $\epsilon$ and alll $\mu_{x,y}$ are [[isomorphisms]], then $F$ is called a **strong monoidal functor**. 

If moreover $(\mathcal{C},\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}, 1_{\mathcal{C}})$ and $(\mathcal{D},\otimes_{\mathcal{D}}, 1_{\mathcal{D}} )$ are equipped with the structure of [[braided monoidal categories]] (def. \ref{BraidedMonoidalCategory}), then the lax monoidal functor $F$ is called a **[[braided monoidal functor]]** if in addition the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commutes]] for all objects $x,y \in \mathcal{C}$

$$
  \array{
    F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} F(y)
      &\overset{\tau^{\mathcal{D}}_{F(x), F(y)}}{\longrightarrow}&
    F(y) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F(x)
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\mu_{x,y}}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\mu_{y,x}}}
    \\
    F(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y )
      &\underset{F(\tau^{\mathcal{C}}_{x,y}  )}{\longrightarrow}&
    F( y \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} x )
  }
  \,.
$$

A [[homomorphism]] $f\;\colon\; (F_1,\mu_1, \epsilon_1) \longrightarrow (F_2, \mu_2, \epsilon_2)$ between two (braided) lax monoidal functors is a **[[monoidal natural transformation]]**, in that it is

* a [[natural transformation]] $f_x \;\colon\; F_1(x) \longrightarrow F_2(x)$ of the underlying functors

compatible with the product and the unit in that the following [[commuting diagram|diagrams commute]] for all objects $x,y \in \mathcal{C}$:

$$
  \array{
    F_1(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F_1(y)
      &\overset{f(x)\otimes_{\mathcal{D}} f(y)}{\longrightarrow}&
    F_2(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F_2(y)
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{(\mu_1)_{x,y}}}\downarrow
     &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{(\mu_2)_{x,y}}}
    \\
    F_1(x\otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y)
     &\underset{f(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y ) }{\longrightarrow}&
    F_2(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y)
  }
$$

and 

$$
  \array{
    && 1_{\mathcal{D}}
    \\
    & {}^{\mathllap{\epsilon_1}}\swarrow && \searrow^{\mathrlap{\epsilon_2}}
    \\
    F_1(1_{\mathcal{C}})
     &&\underset{f(1_{\mathcal{C}})}{\longrightarrow}&&
    F_2(1_{\mathcal{C}})
  }
  \,.
$$

We write $MonFun(\mathcal{C},\mathcal{D})$ for the resulting [[category]] of lax monoidal functors between monoidal categories $\mathcal{C}$ and $\mathcal{D}$, similarly $BraidMonFun(\mathcal{C},\mathcal{D})$ for the category of braided monoidal functors between [[braided monoidal categories]], and $SymMonFun(\mathcal{C},\mathcal{D})$ for the category of braided monoidal functors between [[symmetric monoidal categories]].

=--

+-- {: .num_remark #SymmetricMonoidalFunctor}
###### Remark

In the literature the term "monoidal functor" often refers by default to what in def. \ref{LaxMonoidalFunctor} is called a strong monoidal functor.  But for the purpose of the discussion of [[functors with smash product]] [below](#FunctorsWithSmashProduct), it is crucial to admit the generality of lax monoidal functors.

If $(\mathcal{C},\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}, 1_{\mathcal{C}})$ and $(\mathcal{D},\otimes_{\mathcal{D}}, 1_{\mathcal{D}} )$ are [[symmetric monoidal categories]] (def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory}) then a [[braided monoidal functor]] (def. \ref{LaxMonoidalFunctor}) between them  is often called a **[[symmetric monoidal functor]]**. 

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #ModuleOverAMonoidalFunctor}
###### Definition

Let $(\mathcal{C},\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}, 1_{\mathcal{C}})$ and $(\mathcal{D},\otimes_{\mathcal{D}}, 1_{\mathcal{D}} )$ be two (pointed) [[topologically enriched category|topologically enriched]] [[monoidal categories]] (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}), and let $F \;\colon\; \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow \mathcal{D}$ be a [[topologically enriched functor|topologically enriched]] [[lax monoidal functor]] between them, with product operation $\mu$.

Then a left **[[module over a monoidal functor|module over the lax monoidal functor]]** is 

1. a [[topologically enriched functor]] 

   $$
     G \;\colon\; \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow \mathcal{D}
     \,;
   $$

1. a [[natural transformation]] 
 
   $$
     \rho_{x,y} 
       \;\colon\; 
     F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} N(y)
      \longrightarrow
    N(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y )
   $$

such that

* **(action property)** For all objects $x,y,z \in \mathcal{C}$ the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commutes]]

   $$
     \array{
       (F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} F(y)) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} G(z)
         &\underoverset{\simeq}{a^{\mathcal{D}}_{F(x),F(y),F(z)}}{\longrightarrow}&
       F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}}( F(y)\otimes_{\mathcal{D}} G(z) )
       \\
       {}^{\mathllap{\mu_{x,y} \otimes id}}\downarrow 
         && 
       \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id\otimes \rho_{y,z}}}
       \\
       F(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} G(z)
        &&
       F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} ( G(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y) )
       \\
       {}^{\mathllap{\rho_{x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y , z} } }\downarrow 
         && 
       \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\rho_{ x, y \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} z  }}}
       \\
       G( ( x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y ) \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} z  )
         &\underset{F(a^{\mathcal{C}}_{x,y,z})}{\longrightarrow}&
       G( x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} ( y \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} z ) )
     }
     \,,
   $$

A [[homomorphism]] $f\;\colon\; (G_1, \rho_1) \longrightarrow (G_2,\rho_2)$ between two modules over a monoidal functor $(F,\mu,\epsilon)$ is 

* a [[natural transformation]] $f_x \;\colon\; N_1(x) \longrightarrow N_2(x)$ of the underlying functors

compatible with the action in that the following [[commuting diagram|diagram commute]] for all objects $x,y \in \mathcal{C}$:

$$
  \array{
    F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} N_1(y)
      &\overset{id \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} f(y)}{\longrightarrow}&
    F(x) \otimes_{\mathcal{D}} N_2(y)
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{(\rho_1)_{x,y}}}\downarrow
     &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{(\rhi_2)_{x,y}}}
    \\
    N_1(x\otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y)
     &\underset{f(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y ) }{\longrightarrow}&
    N_2(x \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} y)
  }
$$

We write $F Mod$ for the resulting category of modules over the monoidal functor $F$.

=--



+-- {: .num_prop #DayMonoidsAreLaxMonoidalFunctorsOnTheSite}
###### Proposition

Let $(\mathcal{C},\otimes I)$ be a pointed [[topologically enriched category]] ([[symmetric monoidal category]]) [[monoidal category]] (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}). Regard $(Top_{cg}^{\ast/}, \wedge , S^0)$ as a topological [[symmetric monoidal category]] as in example \ref{PointedTopologicalSpacesWithSmashIsSymmetricMonoidalCategory}.

Then ([[commutative monoid in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative]]) [[monoid in a monoidal category|monoids in]] (def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}) the [[Day convolution]] monoidal category $([\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1_{\mathcal{C}}))$ of prop. \ref{DayConvolutionYieldsMonoidalCategoryStructure} are equivalent to ([[braided monoidal functor|braided]]) [[lax monoidal functors]] (def. \ref{LaxMonoidalFunctor}) of the form

$$
  (\mathcal{C},\otimes, I) \longrightarrow (Top^{\ast}_{cg}, \wedge, S^0)
  \,,
$$

called **[[functors with smash products]]** on $\mathcal{C}$, i.e. there are [[equivalences of categories]] of the form

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    Mon([\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1_{\mathcal{C}}))
      &\simeq
    MonFunc(\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg})
    \\
    CMon([\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1_{\mathcal{C}}))
      &\simeq
    SymMonFunc(\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg})
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Moreover, [[module objects]] over these monoid objects are equivalent to the corresponding [[modules over monoidal functors]].

=--

This is stated in some form in ([Day 70, example 3.2.2](Day+convolution#Day70)). It is highlighted again in ([MMSS 00, prop. 22.1](#MMSS00)). 

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By definition \ref{LaxMonoidalFunctor}, a [[lax monoidal functor]] $F \colon \mathcal{C} \to Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ is a topologically enriched functor equipped with a morphism of [[pointed topological spaces]] of the form

$$
  S^0 \longrightarrow F(1_{\mathcal{C}})
$$

and equipped with a [[natural transformation|natural]] system of maps of pointed topological spaces of the form

$$
  F(c_1) \wedge F(c_2) \longrightarrow F(c_1 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_2)
$$

for all $c_1,c_2 \in \mathcal{C}$.

Under the [[Yoneda lemma]] (prop. \ref{YonedaReductionTopological}) the first of these is equivalently a morphism in $[\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ of the form

$$
  y(S^0) \longrightarrow F
  \,.
$$

Moreover, under the [[natural isomorphism]] of corollary \ref{DayConvolutionViaNaturalIsosInvolvingExternalTensorAndTensor} the second of these is equivalently a morphism in $[\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ of the form

$$
  F \otimes_{Day} F \longrightarrow F
  \,.
$$

Translating the conditions of def. \ref{LaxMonoidalFunctor} satisfied by a [[lax monoidal functor]] through these identifications gives precisely the conditions of def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory} on a ([[commutative monoid in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative]]) [[monoid in a monoidal category|monoid in]] object $F$ under $\otimes_{Day}$.

Similarly for [[module objects]] and [[modules over monoidal functors]].

=--


+-- {: .num_prop #PullbackAlongLaxMonoidalFunctorPreservesMonoidsForDayConvolution}
###### Proposition

Let $f \;\colon\; \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow \mathcal{D}$ be a [[lax monoidal functor]] (def. \ref{LaxMonoidalFunctor}) between pointed [[topologically enriched category|topologically enriched]] [[monoidal categories]] (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}). Then the induced functor

$$
  f^\ast
    \;\colon\;
  [\mathcal{D}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
    \longrightarrow
  [\mathcal{C}, Top_{cg}^{\ast}]
$$

given by $(f^\ast X)(c)\coloneqq X(f(c))$ preserves [[monoid in a monoidal category|monoids]] under [[Day convolution]]

$$
  f^\ast
    \;\colon\;
  Mon([\mathcal{D}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1_{\mathcal{D}}))
    \longrightarrow
  Mon([\mathcal{C}, Top_{cg}^{\ast}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1_{\mathcal{C}})
$$


Moreover, if $\mathcal{C}$ and $\mathcal{D}$ are [[symmetric monoidal categories]] (def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory}) and $f$ is a [[braided monoidal functor]] (def. \ref{LaxMonoidalFunctor}), then $f^\ast$ also preserves [[commutative monoids in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative monoids]]

$$
  f^\ast
    \;\colon\;
  CMon([\mathcal{D}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1_{\mathcal{D}}))
    \longrightarrow
  CMon([\mathcal{C}, Top_{cg}^{\ast}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1_{\mathcal{C}})
  \,.
$$

Similarly, for 

$$
   A 
    \in 
   Mon([\mathcal{D}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}], \otimes_{Day}, y(1_{\mathcal{D}}))
$$

any fixed monoid, then $f^\ast$ sends $A$-[[module object]] to $f^\ast(A)$-modules

$$
  f^\ast
    \;\colon\;
  A Mod(\mathcal{D})
    \longrightarrow
  (f^\ast A)Mod(\mathcal{C})
  \,.
$$




=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

This is an immediate corollary of prop. \ref{DayMonoidsAreLaxMonoidalFunctorsOnTheSite}, since the composite of two (braided) lax monoidal functors is itself canonically a (braided) lax monoidal functor.

=--




#### $\mathbb{S}$-Modules
 {#SModules}

We now give a unified discussion of the categories of

1. [[sequential spectra]]

1. [[symmetric spectra]]

1. [[orthogonal spectra]]

1. pre-[[excisive functors]]

(all in [[topological spaces]]) as [[categories of modules]] with respect to [[Day convolution]] monoidal structures on [[Top]]-[[enriched functor categories]] over restrictions to [[faithful functor|faithful]] sub-[[sites]] of the canonical representative of the [[sphere spectrum]] as an excisive functor on $Top^{\ast/}_{fin}$.

This approach is due to ([Mandell-May-Schwede-Shipley 00](#MMSS00)).


##### Pre-Excisive functors
 {#OnPreExcisiveFunctors}

We now consider an almost tautological construction of a pointed topologically enriched category equipped with a closed symmetric monoidal product: the category of _[[pre-excisive functors]]_. Then we show that this tautological category restricts, in a certain sense, to the category of [[sequential spectra]]. However, under this restriction the symmetric monoidal product breaks, witnessing the lack of a functorial [[smash product of spectra]] on sequential spectra. However from inspection of this failure we see that there are categories of [[structured spectra]] "in between" those of all pre-excisive functors and plain sequential spectra, notably the categories of _[[orthogonal spectra]]_ and of _[[symmetric spectra]]_. These intermediate categories retain the concrete tractable nature of sequential spectra, but are rich enough to also retain the symmetric monoidal product inherited from pre-excisive functors: this is the _[[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]]_ that we are after.

**Literature** ([MMSS 00, Part I and Part III](#MMSS00))

$\,$

+-- {: .num_defn #FinitePointedCWComplexes}
###### Definition

Write 

$$
  \iota_{fin}\;\colon\; Top^{\ast/}_{cg,fin} \hookrightarrow Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
$$ 

for the [[full subcategory]] of [[pointed topological spaces|pointed]] [[compactly generated topological spaces]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#Top)) on those that admit the structure of a [[finite CW-complex]] (a [[CW-complex]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicalCellComplex)) with a [[finite number]] of cells). 

We say that the pointed topological [[enriched functor category]] (def. \ref{PointedTopologicalFunctorCategory})

$$
  Exc(Top_{cg})
   \coloneqq 
  [Top^{\ast/}_{cg,fin}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
$$

is the category of **[[pre-excisive functors]]**. 

Write

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{exc}
    \coloneqq
  y(S^0)
  \coloneqq
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg,fin}(S^0,-)
$$

for the [[representable functor|functor co-represented]] by [[0-sphere]]. This is equivalently the inclusion $\iota_{fin}$ itself:

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{exc} = \iota_{fin} 
    \;\colon\;
  K \mapsto K
  \,.
$$

We call this the standard incarnation of the **[[sphere spectrum]]** as a pre-excisive functor.

By prop. \ref{DayConvolutionYieldsMonoidalCategoryStructure} the [[smash product]] of [[pointed topological spaces|pointed]] [[compactly generated topological spaces]] induces the structure of a [[closed monoidal category|closed]] (def. \ref{ClosedMonoidalCategory}) [[symmetric monoidal category]] (def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory})

$$
  \left( 
    Exc(Top_{cg})
    ,\;
    \wedge_{Day}
    ,\; 
   \mathbb{S}_{exc}
  \right)
$$

with 

1. [[tensor unit]] the [[sphere spectrum]] $\mathbb{S}_{exc}$;

1. [[tensor product]] the [[Day convolution product]] $\otimes_{Day}$ from def. \ref{TopologicalDayConvolutionProduct},

   called the **[[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]]** for the model of pre-excisive functors;

1. [[internal hom]] the dual operation $[-,-]_{Day}$ from prop. \ref{DayMonoidalStructureIsClosed},

   called the **[[mapping spectrum]]** construction for pre-excisive functors.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark #EveryPreExcisiveFunctorIsSModule}
###### Remark

By example \ref{MonoidGivenByTensorUnit} the [[sphere spectrum]] incarnated as a pre-excisive functor $\mathbb{S}_{exc}$ (according to def. \ref{FinitePointedCWComplexes}) is canonically a [[commutative monoid in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative monoid in]] the category of pre-excisive functors  (def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory})

Moreover, by example \ref{EveryObjectIsModuleOverTensorUnit}, every object of $Exc(Top_{cg})$ (def. \ref{FinitePointedCWComplexes}) is canonically a [[module object]] over $\mathbb{S}_{exc}$. We may therefore tautologically identify the category of pre-excisive functors with the [[module category]] over the sphere spectrum:

$$
  Exc(Top_{cg})
    \simeq
  \mathbb{S}_{exc}Mod
  \,.
$$

=--

We now consider restricting the domain of the pre-excisive functors of def. \ref{FinitePointedCWComplexes}.

+-- {: .num_defn #TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra}
###### Definition

Define the following [[pointed topologically enriched categories|pointed topologically enriched]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)) [[symmetric monoidal categories]] (def. \ref{SymmetricMonoidalCategory}):

1. $Seq$ is the category whose objects are the [[natural numbers]] and which has only identity morphisms and [[zero morphisms]] on these objects, hence the [[hom-spaces]] are

   $$
     Seq(n_1,n_2)  
       \;\coloneqq\;
     \left\{
       \array{
          S^0 & for\; n_1 = n_2
          \\
          \ast & otherwise
       }
    \right.
   $$

   The tensor product is the addition of natural numbers, $\otimes = +$, and the [[tensor unit]] is 0. The [[braiding]] is, necessarily, the identity.

1. $Sym$ is the standard [[skeletal category|skeleton]] of the [[core]] of [[FinSet]] with [[zero morphisms]] adjoined: its [[objects]] are the [[finite sets]] $\overline{n} \coloneqq \{1, \cdots,n\}$ for $n \in \mathbb{N}$, all non-[[zero morphism|zero]] morphisms are [[automorphisms]] and the [[automorphism group]] of $\{1,\cdots,n\}$ is the [[symmetric group]] $\Sigma(n)$ on $n$ elements, hence the [[hom-spaces]] are the following [[discrete topological spaces]]:

   $$
     Sym(n_1, n_2) 
      \;\coloneqq\;
     \left\{
       \array{
          (\Sigma(n_1))_+ & for \; n_1 = n_2
          \\
          \ast & otherwise
       }
     \right.
   $$

   The [[tensor product]] is the [[disjoint union]] of sets, tensor unit is the [[empty set]]. The [[braiding]] 

   $$
     \tau_{n_1 , n_2}
     \;\colon\;
     \overline{n_1} \cup \overline{n_2}
       \overset{}{\longrightarrow}
     \overline{n_2} \cup \overline{n_1}
   $$

   is given by the canonical [[permutation]] in $\Sigma_{n_1+n_2}$ that [[shuffle|shuffles]] the first $n_1$ elements past the remaining $n_2$ elements.


1. $Orth$ has as objects finite dimenional real linear [[inner product spaces]] $(V, \langle -,-\rangle)$ and as non-zero morphisms the [[linear map|linear]] [[isometry|isometric]] [[isomorphisms]] between these; hence the [[automorphism group]] of the object $(V, \langle -,-\rangle)$ is the [[orthogonal group]] $O(V)$; the monoidal product is [[direct sum]] of linear spaces, the tensor unit is the 0-vector space; again we turn this into a $Top^{\ast/}$-enriched category by adjoining a basepoint to the hom-spaces;
  
   $$
     Orth(V_1,V_2) 
       \;\coloneqq\;
     \left\{
        \array{
          O(V_1)_+ & for \; dim(V_1) = dim(V_2)
          \\
          \ast & otherwise
        }
     \right.
   $$

   The [[tensor product]] is the [[direct sum]] of linear inner product spaces, tensor unit is the 0-vector space. The [[braiding]] is that of $Sym$, under the canonical embedding $\Sigma_{n_1+n_2} \hookrightarrow O(n_1+n_2)$ of the [[symmetric group]] into the [[orthogonal group]].

Notice that in the notation of example \ref{CoendGivesQuotientByDiagonalGroupAction}

1. the [[full subcategory]] of $Orth$ on $V$ is $\mathbf{B}(O(V)_+)$;

1. the [[full subcategory]] of $Sym$ on $\{1,\cdots,n\}$ is $\mathbf{B}(\Sigma(n)_+)$;

1. the [[full subcategory]] of $Seq$ on $n$ is $\mathbf{B}(1_+)$.

Moreover, after discarding the [[zero morphisms]], then these categories are the disjoint union of categories of the form $\mathbf{B}O(n)$, $\mathbf{B}\Sigma(n)$ and $\mathbf{B}1 = \ast$, respectively.

There is a sequence of canonical [[faithful functor|faithful]] pointed topological [[subcategory]] inclusions 

$$
 \array{
   Seq 
     &\stackrel{seq}{\hookrightarrow}& 
   Sym 
    &\stackrel{sym}{\hookrightarrow}& 
   Orth 
     &\stackrel{orth}{\hookrightarrow}& 
   Top_{cg,fin}^{\ast/}
   \\
   n 
    &\mapsto& 
   \{1,\cdots, n\} 
     &\mapsto& 
   \mathbb{R}^n 
    &\mapsto& 
   S^n
   \\
    && 
    && 
   V
    &\mapsto& 
   S^V
  }
  \,,
$$

into the pointed topological category of pointed compactly generated topological spaces of finite CW-type (def. \ref{FinitePointedCWComplexes}).

Here $S^V$ denotes the [[one-point compactification]] of $V$. On morphisms $sym \colon (\Sigma_n)_+ \hookrightarrow (O(n))_+$ is the canonical inclusion of [[permutation]] matrices into [[orthogonal group|orthogonal]] matrices and $orth \colon O(V)_+ \hookrightarrow Aut(S^V)$ is on $O(V)$ the [[topological subspace]] inclusions of the pointed [[homeomorphisms]] $S^V \to S^V$ that are induced under forming [[one-point compactification]] from linear isometries of $V$ ("[[representation spheres]]").

Consider the pointed topological diagram categries  (def. \ref{PointedTopologicalFunctorCategory}, [exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctorsToTopk)) over these categories:

* $[Seq,Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ called the category of **sequences** of pointed topological spaces (e.g. [HSS 00, def. 2.3.1](#HoveyShipleySmith00));

* $[Sym,Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ called the category of **symmetric sequences** (e.g. [HSS 00, def. 2.1.1](#HoveyShipleySmith00));

* $[Orth, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ called the category of **orthogonal sequences**.

Consider the sequence of restrictions of topological diagram categories, according to prop. \ref{PullbackAlongLaxMonoidalFunctorPreservesMonoidsForDayConvolution} along the above inclusions:

$$
  Exc(Top_{cg})
    \overset{orth^\ast}{\longrightarrow}
  [Orth,Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
    \overset{sym^\ast}{\longrightarrow}
  [Sym,Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
    \overset{seq^\ast}{\longrightarrow}
  [Seq,Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
  \,.
$$

Write 

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{orth} \coloneqq orth^\ast \mathbb{S}_{exc} 
  \,,
  \;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;
  \mathbb{S}_{sym} \coloneqq sym^\ast \mathbb{S}_{orth} 
  \,,
  \;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;
  \mathbb{S}_{seq} \coloneqq seq^\ast \mathbb{S}_{sym} 
$$

for the restriction of the excisive functor incarnation of the [[sphere spectrum]] (from def. \ref{FinitePointedCWComplexes}) along these inclusions.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #BraidedFunctorsOrthAndSym}
###### Proposition

The functors $seq$, $sym$ and $orth$ in def. \ref{TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra} become [[strong monoidal functors]] (def. \ref{LaxMonoidalFunctor}) when equipped with the canonical isomorphisms

$$
  seq(n_1) \cup seq(n_2)
   =
  \{1,\cdots, n_1\} \cup \{1, \cdots, n_2\}
  \simeq
   \{1, \cdots, n_1+ n_2\}
  =
  seq(n_1 + n_2)
$$

and

$$
  sym(\{1,\cdots,n_1\}) \oplus sym(\{1,\cdots,n_2\})
  =
  \mathbb{R}^{n_1} \oplus \mathbb{R}^{n_2}
  \simeq
  \mathbb{R}^{n_1 + n_2}
  =
  sym(\{1,\cdots, n_1\} \cup \{1,\cdots, n_2\})
$$

and

$$
  orth(V_1) \wedge orth(V_2)
  =
  S^{V_1} \wedge S^{V_2}
  \simeq
  S^{V_1 \oplus V_2}
  =
  orth(V_1 \oplus V_2)
  \,.
$$

Moreover, $orth$ and $sym$ are [[braided monoidal functors]] (def. \ref{LaxMonoidalFunctor}) (hence [[symmetric monoidal functors]], remark \ref{SymmetricMonoidalFunctor}). But $seq$ is _not_ braided monoidal.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The first statement is clear from inspection. 

For the second statement it is sufficient to observe that all the nontrivial braiding of [[n-spheres]] in $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ is given by the maps induced from exchanging coordinates in the realization of $n$-spheres as [[one-point compactifications]] of [[Cartesian spaces]] $S^n \simeq (\mathbb{R}^n)^\ast$. This corresponds precisely to the action of the [[symmetric group]] inside the [[orthogonal group]] acting via the canonical action of the orthogonal group on $\mathbb{R}^n$. This shows that $sym$ and $orth$ are braided, for they include precisely these objects (the $n$-spheres) with these braidings on them. Finally it is clear that $seq$ is not braided, because the braiding on $Seq$ is trivial, while that on $Sym$ is not, so $seq$ necessrily fails to preserve precisely these non-trivial isomorphisms.

=--


+-- {: .num_remark #RestrictionsOfExcisiveSphere}
###### Remark


Since the standard excisive incarnation $\mathbb{S}_{exc}$ of the [[sphere spectrum]] (def. \ref{FinitePointedCWComplexes}) is the [[tensor unit]] with repect to the [[Day convolution]] product on pre-excisive functors, and since it is therefore canonically a [[commutative monoid]], by example \ref{MonoidGivenByTensorUnit}, 
prop. \ref{PullbackAlongLaxMonoidalFunctorPreservesMonoidsForDayConvolution}
says that the restricted sphere spectra $\mathbb{S}_{orth}$, $\mathbb{S}_{sym}$ and $\mathbb{S}_{seq}$ are still [[monoid object|monoids]], and that under restriction every [[pre-excisive functor]], regarded as a $\mathbb{S}_{exc}$-[[module object|module]] via remark \ref{EveryPreExcisiveFunctorIsSModule}, canonically becomes a [[module object|module]] under the restricted sphere spectrum:

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    orth^\ast
    & \colon\;
  Exc(Top_{cg})
  \simeq
  \mathbb{S}_{exc} Mod
   \longrightarrow
  \mathbb{S}_{orth} Mod
  \\
  sym^\ast
   &\colon\;
  Exc(Top_{cg})
  \simeq
  \mathbb{S}_{exc} Mod
   \longrightarrow
  \mathbb{S}_{sym} Mod
  \\
  seq^\ast
   &\colon\;
  Exc(Top_{cg})
  \simeq
  \mathbb{S}_{exc} Mod
   \longrightarrow
  \mathbb{S}_{seq} Mod
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Since all three functors $orth$, $sym$ and $seq$ are strong monoidal functors by prop. \ref{BraidedFunctorsOrthAndSym}, all three restricted sphere spectra $\mathbb{S}_{orth}$, $\mathbb{S}_{sym}$ and $\mathbb{S}_{seq}$ canonically are [[monoids]], by prop. \ref{PullbackAlongLaxMonoidalFunctorPreservesMonoidsForDayConvolution}.
Moreover, according to prop. \ref{BraidedFunctorsOrthAndSym}, $orth$ and $sym$ are [[braided monoidal functors]], while functor $seq$ is not braided, therefore prop. \ref{PullbackAlongLaxMonoidalFunctorPreservesMonoidsForDayConvolution} furthermore gives that $\mathbb{S}_{orth}$ and $\mathbb{S}_{sym}$ are [[commutative monoid in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative monoids]], while $\mathbb{S}_{seq}$ is not commutative:


| [[sphere spectrum]] | $\mathbb{S}_{exc}$ | $\mathbb{S}_{orth}$ | $\mathbb{S}_{sym}$ | $\mathbb{S}_{seq}$ |
|--|--------------|---------------------|--------------------|-------------------|
| [[monoid in a monoidal category|monoid]] | yes | yes | yes | yes |
| [[commutative monoid in a symmetric monoidal category|commutative monoid]] | yes | yes | yes | no |
| [[tensor unit]] | yes | no | no | no |


=--

+-- {: .num_prop #SseqModulesAreSequentialSpectra}
###### Proposition

There is an [[equivalence of categories]]

$$
  (-)^{seq}
  \;\colon\;
  \mathbb{S}_{seq} Mod
    \overset{}{\longrightarrow}
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
$$

which identifies the [[category of modules]] (def. \ref{ModulesInMonoidalCategory}) over the [[monoid object|monoid]] $\mathbb{S}_{seq}$ (remark \ref{RestrictionsOfExcisiveSphere}) in the [[Day convolution]] monoidal structure (prop. \ref{DayConvolutionYieldsMonoidalCategoryStructure}) over the topological functor category $[Seq,Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ from def. \ref{TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra} with the category of [[sequential spectra]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+1#SequentialSpectra))

Under this equivalence, an $\mathbb{S}_{seq}$-module $X$ is taken to the sequential pre-spectrum $X^{seq}$ whose component spaces are the values of the [[pre-excisive functor]] $X$ on the standard [[n-sphere]] $S^n = (S^1)^{\wedge n}$

$$
  (X^{seq})_n \coloneqq X(seq(n)) = X(S^n)
$$

and whose structure maps are the images of the action morphisms

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{seq} \otimes_{Day} X
    \longrightarrow
  X
$$

under the isomorphism of corollary \ref{DayConvolutionViaNaturalIsosInvolvingExternalTensorAndTensor}

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{seq}(n_1) \wedge X(n_1) \longrightarrow X_{n_1 + n_2}
$$

evaluated at $n_1 = 1$

$$
  \array{
    \mathbb{S}_{seq}(1) \wedge X(n) 
      &\longrightarrow& 
    X_{n+1}
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\simeq}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\simeq}}
    \\
    S^1 \wedge X_n &\longrightarrow& X_{n+1}
  }
  \,.
$$



=--

([HoveyShipleySmith 00, prop. 2.3.4](#HoveyShipleySmith00))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

After unwinding the definitions, the only point to observe is that due to the action property, 

$$
  \array{
    \mathbb{S}_{seq} \otimes_{Day} \mathbb{S}_{seq} \otimes_{Day} X
      &\overset{id \otimes_{Day} \rho}{\longrightarrow}&
    \mathbb{S}_{seq} \otimes_{Day} X
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\mu \otimes_{Day} id } }\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\rho}}
    \\
    \mathbb{S}_{seq} \otimes_{Day} X
      &\underset{\rho}{\longrightarrow}&
    X
  }
$$

any $\mathbb{S}_{seq}$-action 

$$
  \rho
  \;\colon\;
  \mathbb{S}_{seq} \otimes_{Day} X \longrightarrow X
$$

is indeed uniquely fixed by the components of the form

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{seq}(1) \wedge X(n) \longrightarrow X(n)
  \,.
$$

This is because under corollary \ref{DayConvolutionViaNaturalIsosInvolvingExternalTensorAndTensor} the action property is identified with the componentwise property

$$
  \array{
    S^{n_1} \wedge S^{n_2} \wedge X_{n_3}
      &\overset{id \wedge \rho_{n_2,n_3}}{\longrightarrow}&
    S^{n_1} \wedge X_{n_2 + n_3}
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\simeq}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\rho_{n_1,n_2+n_3}}}
    \\
    S^{n_1 + n_2} \wedge X_{n_3}
     &\underset{\rho_{n_1+n_2,n_3}}{\longrightarrow}&
    X_{n_1 + n_2 + n_3}
  }
  \,,
$$

where the left vertical morphism is an isomorphism by the nature of $\mathbb{S}_{seq}$. Hence this fixes the components $\rho_{n',n}$ to be the $n'$-fold composition of the structure maps $\sigma_n \coloneqq \rho(1,n)$.

=--

However, since, by remark \ref{SseqModulesAreSequentialSpectra}, $\mathbb{S}_{seq}$ is not commutative, there is no tensor product induced on $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ under the identification in prop. \ref{SseqModulesAreSequentialSpectra}. But since $\mathbb{S}_{orth}$ and $\mathbb{S}_{sym}$ are commutative monoids by remark \ref{SseqModulesAreSequentialSpectra}, it makes sense to consider the following definition.

+-- {: .num_defn #SsymModuleSymmetricSpectra}
###### Definition

In the terminology of remark \ref{RestrictionsOfExcisiveSphere} we say that

$$
  OrthSpec(Top_{cg})
   \coloneqq
  \mathbb{S}_{orth} Mod
$$

is the **[[category]] of [[orthogonal spectra]]**; and that

$$
  SymSpec(Top_{cg})
   \coloneqq
  \mathbb{S}_{sym} Mod
$$

is the **[[category]] of [[symmetric spectra]]**.

By remark \ref{RestrictionsOfExcisiveSphere} and by prop. \ref{MonoidalCategoryOfModules} these categories canonically carry a [[symmetric monoidal category|symmetric monoidal]] [[tensor product]] $\otimes_{\mathbb{S}_{orth}}$ and $\otimes_{\mathbb{S}_{seq}}$, respectively. This we call the **[[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]]**. We usually just write for short

$$
  \wedge 
    \coloneqq 
  \otimes_{\mathbb{S}_{orth}}   
  \;\colon\;
  OrthSpec(Top_{cg}) \times OrthSpec(Top_{cg})
   \longrightarrow
  OrthSpec(Top_{cg})
$$

and

$$
  \wedge 
    \coloneqq 
  \otimes_{\mathbb{S}_{sym}}   
  \;\colon\;
  SymSpec(Top_{cg}) \times SymSpec(Top_{cg})
   \longrightarrow
  SymSpec(Top_{cg})
$$


=--

In the next section we work out what these symmetric monoidal categories of orthogonal and of symmetric spectra look like more explicitly.







##### Symmetric and orthogonal spectra
 {#SymmetricSpectra}


We now define [[symmetric spectra]] and [[orthogonal spectra]] and their symmetric monoidal smash product. We proceed by giving the explicit definitions and then checking that these are equivalent to the abstract definition \ref{SsymModuleSymmetricSpectra} from above.

**Literature.** ( [Hovey-Shipley-Smith 00, section 1, section 2](#HoveyShipleySmith00), [Schwede 12, chapter I](#Schwede12)) 

$\,$

+-- {: .num_defn #SymmetricSpectrum}
###### Definition

A topological **[[symmetric spectrum]]** $X$  is

1. a sequence $\{X_n  \in Top_{cg}^{\ast/}\;\vert\; n \in \mathbb{N}\}$ of [[pointed topological space|pointed]] [[compactly generated topological spaces]];

1. a basepoint preserving continuous right [[action]] of the [[symmetric group]] $\Sigma_n$ on $X_n$;

1. a sequence of morphisms  $\sigma_n \colon S^1 \wedge X_n  \longrightarrow X_{n+1}$ 

such that

* for all $n, k \in \mathbb{N}$ the [[composition|composite]]

  $$
    S^{k} \wedge X_n 
     \simeq
    S^{k-1} \wedge S^1 \wedge X_n
      \stackrel{id \wedge \sigma_n }{\longrightarrow} 
    S^{k-1} \wedge X_{n+1} 
      \simeq
    S^{k-2}\wedge S^1 \wedge X_{n+2}
      \stackrel{id \wedge \sigma_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow} 
    \cdots 
    \stackrel{\sigma_{n+k-1}}{\longrightarrow} X_{n+k}
  $$

  [[intertwiner|intertwines]] the $\Sigma_{n} \times \Sigma_k$-[[action]].

A [[homomorphism]] of symmetric spectra $f\colon X \longrightarrow Y$ is

* a sequence of maps $f_n \colon X_n \longrightarrow Y_n$

such that

1. each $f_n$ [[intertwiner|intetwines]] the $\Sigma_n$-[[action]];

1. the following [[commuting diagram|diagrams commute]]

   $$
     \array{
        S^1 \wedge X_n  
          &\stackrel{f_n \wedge id}{\longrightarrow}& 
        S^1 \wedge Y_n 
        \\
        \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma^X_n}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma^Y_n}}
        \\
        X_{n+1} &\stackrel{f_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow}& Y_{n+1}
     }
     \,.
   $$

We write $SymSpec(Top_{cg})$ for the resulting [[category]] of symmetric spectra.

=--

([Hovey-Shipley-Smith 00, def. 1.2.2](#HoveyShipleySmith00), [Schwede 12, def. 1.1](#Schwede12))


+-- {: .num_defn #OrthogonalSpectrum}
###### Definition

A topological **[[orthogonal spectrum]]** $X$  is

1. a sequence $\{X_n  \in Top_{cg}^{\ast/}\;\vert\; n \in \mathbb{N}\}$ of [[pointed topological space|pointed]] [[compactly generated topological spaces]];

1. a basepoint preserving continuous right [[action]] of the [[orthogonal group]] $O(n)$ on $X_n$;

1. a sequence of morphisms  $\sigma_n \colon S^1 \wedge X_n  \longrightarrow X_{n+1}$ 

such that

* for all $n, k \in \mathbb{N}$ the [[composition|composite]]

  $$
    S^{k} \wedge X_n 
     \simeq
    S^{k-1} \wedge S^1 \wedge X_n
      \stackrel{id \wedge \sigma_n }{\longrightarrow} 
    S^{k-1} \wedge X_{n+1} 
      \simeq
    S^{k-2}\wedge S^1 \wedge X_{n+2}
      \stackrel{id \wedge \sigma_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow} 
    \cdots 
    \stackrel{\sigma_{n+k-1}}{\longrightarrow} X_{n+k}
  $$

  [[intertwiner|intertwines]] the $O(n) \times Ok()$-[[action]].

A [[homomorphism]] of orthogonal spectra $f\colon X \longrightarrow Y$ is

* a sequence of maps $f_n \colon X_n \longrightarrow Y_n$

such that

1. each $f_n$ [[intertwiner|intetwines]] the $O(n)$-[[action]];

1. the following [[commuting diagram|diagrams commute]]

   $$
     \array{
        S^1 \wedge X_n  
          &\stackrel{f_n \wedge id}{\longrightarrow}& 
        S^1 \wedge Y_n 
        \\
        \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma^X_n}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma^Y_n}}
        \\
        X_{n+1} &\stackrel{f_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow}& Y_{n+1}
     }
     \,.
   $$

We write $OrthSpec(Top_{cg})$ for the resulting [[category]] of symmetric spectra.

=--


+-- {: .num_prop #DiagramSpectraGiveSymmetricAndOrthogonalSpectra}
###### Proposition

Definitions \ref{SymmetricSpectrum} and \ref{OrthogonalSpectrum}
are indeed equivalent to def. \ref{SsymModuleSymmetricSpectra}:

$$
  OrthSpec(Top_{cg})
   \simeq
  \mathbb{S}_{orth} Mod
$$

and

$$
  SymSpec(Top_{cg})
   \simeq
  \mathbb{S}_{sym} Mod
  \,.
$$

=--

([Hovey-Shipley-Smith 00, prop. 2.2.1](#HoveyShipleySmith00))

+-- {: .num_defn #SmashProductOfSymmetricSpectra}
###### Definition

Given $X,Y \in SymSpec(Top_{cg})$ two [[symmetric spectra]], def. \ref{SymmetricSpectrum}, then their **[[smash product of spectra]]** is the symmetric spectrum

$$
  X \wedge Y \in SymSpec(Top_{cg})
$$

with component spaces the [[coequalizer]]

$$
  \underset{p+1+q = n}{\bigvee}
  (\Sigma_{p+1+q})_+ 
    \underset{\Sigma_p \times \Sigma_1 \times \Sigma_q}{\wedge}
  X_p \wedge S^1 \wedge X_q
  \underoverset
   {\underset{r}{\longrightarrow}}
   {\overset{\ell}{\longrightarrow}}
   {\phantom{AAAA}}
  \underset{p+q=n}{\bigvee}
   (\Sigma_{p+q})_+
   \underset{\Sigma_p \times \Sigma_q}{\wedge}
   X_p \wedge X_q
  \overset{coequ}{\longrightarrow}
  (X \wedge Y)(n)
$$

where $\ell$ has components given by the structure maps

$$
  X_p \wedge S^1 \wedge X_q
    \overset{id \wedge \sigma_q}{\longrightarrow}
  X_p \wedge X_q
$$

while $r$ has components given by the structure maps conjugated by the [[braiding]] in $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ and the [[permutation]] [[action]] $\chi_{p,1}$ (that [[shuffle|shuffles]] the element on the right to the left)

$$
  X_p \wedge S^1 \wedge X_q
    \overset{\tau_{X_p,S^1} \wedge id}{\longrightarrow}
  S^1 \wedge X_p \wedge X_q
    \overset{\sigma_p\wedge id}{\longrightarrow}
  X_{p+1} \wedge X_q
    \overset{\chi_{p,1} \wedge id}{\longrightarrow}
  X_{1+p} \wedge X_q
  \,.
$$

The structure maps of $X \wedge Y$ are those induced under the coequalizer by

$$
  S^1 \wedge X_p \wedge X_q
   \overset{\sigma_p\wedge id}{\longrightarrow}
  X_{p+1} \wedge X_q
  \,.
$$

=--

(e.g. [Schwede 12, p. 82](#Schwede12))

+-- {: .num_prop #AbstractFormulaGivesSmashProductOfSymmetricSpectra}
###### Proposition

Under the identification of prop. \ref{DiagramSpectraGiveSymmetricAndOrthogonalSpectra}, the explicit [[smash product of spectra]] in def. \ref{SmashProductOfSymmetricSpectra} is equivalent to the abstractly defined tensor product in def. \ref{SsymModuleSymmetricSpectra}:

$$
  \wedge \simeq \otimes_{\mathbb{S}_{sym}}
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By def. \ref{TensorProductOfModulesOverCommutativeMonoidObject} the tensor product of two $\mathbb{S}_{sym}$-modules $X$ and $Y$ is the [[coequalizer]] 

$$
  X \otimes_{Day} \mathbb{S}_{sym} \otimes_{Day} Y
  \underoverset
    {\underset{\rho_{1}\circ (\tau_{X, \mathbb{S}_{sym}} \otimes Y)}{\longrightarrow}}
    {\overset{X \otimes \rho_2}{\longrightarrow}}
    {\phantom{AAAA}}
  X \otimes Y
    \overset{coequ}{\longrightarrow}
  X \otimes_{\mathbb{S}_{seq}} Y
  \,.
$$

The [[Day convolution]] product appearing here is over the category $Sym$ from def. \ref{TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra}. By example \ref{CoendGivesQuotientByDiagonalGroupAction} and unwinding the definitions, this is for any two symmetric spectra $A$ and $B$ given degreewise by the [[wedge sum]] of component spaces summing to that total degree, smashed with the symmetric group with basepoint adjoined and then quotiented by the diagonal action of the symmetric group acting on the degrees separately:

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    (A \otimes_{Day} B)(n)
    & =
    \overset{n_1,n_2}{\int}
     \underset{
      = \left\{
          \array{
             \Sigma_{n_1 + n_2} & if \; n_1+n_2 = n 
             \\
             \emptyset & otherwise
           }
      \right.
     }{
       \underbrace{Sym(n_1 + n_2, n)}
     }_+
      \wedge
     A_{n_1}
      \wedge
     B_{n_1}
    \\
    & \simeq
    \underset{n_1 + n_2 = n}{\bigvee}
     (\Sigma_{n_1+n_2})_+
     \underset{\Sigma_{n_1}\times \Sigma_{n_2}}{\wedge}     
     \left(
       A_{n_1}
         \wedge
       B_{n_2}
     \right)
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

This gives the form of the coequalizer and the nature of the morphism $\ell$. To see that the morphism $r$ involves conjugation by the braiding $\tau^{Top^{\ast/}_{cg}}$ in $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ and the symmetric group action, which by def. \ref{TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra} is the braiding $\tau^{Sym}_{n_1,n_2}$ in $Sym$, use the formula for the braiding of the Day convolution tensor product from prop. \ref{DayConvolutionYieldsMonoidalCategoryStructure}:

$$
  \tau_{A,B}(n)
  =
  \overset{n_1,n_2}{\int}
   Sym( \tau^{Sym}_{n_1,n_2}, n )
    \wedge 
   \tau^{Top^{\ast/}_{cg}}_{A_{n_1}, B_{n_2}}
  \,.
$$

=--


##### As diagram spectra

In the discussion [above](#StrictModelStructureOnSequentialSpectra) we had obtained the strict/level [[model structure on topological sequential spectra]] by identifying the category $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ of sequential spectra with a category of [[topologically enriched functors]] with values in $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ (prop. \ref{SequentialSpectraAsDiagramSpectra}) and then invoking the general existence of the [[projective model structure on functors]] ([thm.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ProjectiveModelStructureOnTopologicalFunctors)).

Now we discuss the analogous construction for the more general structured spectra from [above](#SModules).

+-- {: .num_prop #ModulesForDayConvolutionAsEnrichedFunctors}
###### Proposition

Let $(\mathcal{C},\otimes_{\mathcal{C}}, 1_{\mathcal{C}})$ be a [[topologically enriched category|topologically enriched]] [[monoidal category]] (def. \ref{MonoidalCategory}), and let $A \in Mon([\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}],\otimes_{Day}, y(1_{\mathcal{C}}))$ be a [[monoid in a monoidal category|monoid in]] (def. \ref{MonoidsInMonoidalCategory}) the pointed topological [[Day convolution]] monoidal category over $\mathcal{C}$ from prop. \ref{DayConvolutionYieldsMonoidalCategoryStructure}.

Then the [[category of modules|category of left A-modules]] (def. \ref{ModulesInMonoidalCategory}) is a pointed topologically [[enriched functor category]] category ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctorsToTopk))

$$
  A Mod
  \;\simeq\;
  [ A Free_{\mathcal{C}}Mod^{op}, \; Top_{cg}^{\ast/} ]
  \,,
$$

over the category of [[free modules]] over $A$ (def. \ref{MonoidModuleOverItself}) on objects in $\mathcal{C}$ (under the [[Yoneda embedding]] $y \colon \mathcal{C}^{op} \to [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$). Hence the objects of $A Free_{\mathcal{C}}Mod$ are identified with those of $\mathcal{C}$, and its [[hom-spaces]] are

$$
  A Free_{\mathcal{C}}Mod( c_1, c_2)
  \;=\;
  A Mod( A \otimes_{Day} y(c_1),\; A \otimes_{Day} y(c_2) )
  \,.
$$

=--

([MMSS 00, theorem 2.2](#MMSS00))


+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof


Use the identification from prop. \ref{DayMonoidsAreLaxMonoidalFunctorsOnTheSite} of $A$ with a [[lax monoidal functor]] and of any $A$-[[module object]] $N$ as a functor with the structure of a [[module over a monoidal functor]], given by [[natural transformations]]

$$
  A(c_1)\otimes N(c_2) \overset{\rho_{c_1,c_2}}{\longrightarrow} N(c_1 \otimes c_2)
  \,.
$$

Notice that these transformations have just the same structure as those of the [[enriched functor|enriched functoriality]] of $N$ ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor)) of the form

$$
  \mathcal{C}(c_1,c_2) \otimes N(c_1) \overset{}{\longrightarrow} N(c_2)
  \,.
$$

Hence we may unify these two kinds of transformations into a single kind of the form

$$
   \mathcal{C}(c_3 \otimes c_1 , c_2) 
        \otimes 
      A(c_3)
      \otimes
    N(c_1)   
      \overset{id \otimes \rho_{c_3,c_1}}{\longrightarrow}
    \mathcal{C}(c_3 \otimes c_1, c_2) 
      \otimes
    N(c_3 \otimes c_2)    
      \longrightarrow
    N(c_2)
$$

and subject to certain identifications.

Now observe that the hom-objects of $A Free_{\mathcal{C}}Mod$  have just this structure:

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    A Free_{\mathcal{C}}Mod(c_2,c_1)
      & =
    A Mod( A \otimes_{Day} y(c_2) , A \otimes_{Day} y(c_1) )
    \\
      & \simeq
    [\mathcal{C},Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](y(c_2), A \otimes_{Day} y(c_1) )
    \\
      & \simeq
    (A \otimes_{Day} y(c_1) )(c_2)
    \\
      & \simeq
     \overset{c_3,c_4}{\int}
       \mathcal{C}(c_3 \otimes c_4,c_2)
         \wedge
       A(c_3) \wedge \mathcal{C}(c_1, c_4)
     \\
     & \simeq 
     \overset{c_3}{\int}
       \mathcal{C}(c_3 \otimes c_1, c_2)
       \wedge  A (c_3)
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Here we used first the [[free-forgetful adjunction]] of prop. \ref{MonoidModuleOverItself}, then the [[enriched Yoneda lemma]] (prop. \ref{YonedaReductionTopological}), then the [[coend]]-expression for [[Day convolution]] (def. \ref{TopologicalDayConvolutionProduct}) and finally the [[co-Yoneda lemma]] (prop. \ref{TopologicalCoYonedaLemma}).

Then define a [[topologically enriched category]] $\mathcal{D}$ to have [[objects]] and [[hom-spaces]] those of $A Free_{\mathcal{C}}Mod^{op}$ as above, and whose [[composition]] operation is defined as follows:


$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \mathcal{D}(c_2,c3) \wedge \mathcal{D}(c_1,c_2)
    & \simeq
    \left(
    \overset{c_5}{\int} 
      \mathcal{C}(c_5 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_2 , c_3 )
      \wedge A(c_5)
    \right)
      \wedge
    \left(
    \overset{c_4}{\int} 
       \mathcal{C}(c_4 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_1, c_2)     
       \wedge
       A(c_4)
    \right)
    \\
    & \simeq
    \overset{c_4, c_5}{\int} 
      \mathcal{C}(c_5 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_2 , c_3)
        \wedge
      \mathcal{C}(c_4 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_1, c_2 )
        \wedge
      A(c_5) \wedge A(c_4)    
    \\
    & \longrightarrow
      \overset{c_4,c_5}{\int} 
      \mathcal{C}(c_5 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_2 , c_3)
        \wedge
      \mathcal{C}(c_5 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_4 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_1, c_5 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_2 )
        \wedge
       A(c_5  \otimes_{\mathcal{C}}  c_4   )     
     \\
     & \longrightarrow
      \overset{c_4, c_5}{\int} 
      \mathcal{C}(c_5 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_4 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_1, c_5 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_2 )
        \wedge
       A(c_5  \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_4 )     
     \\
     & \longrightarrow
      \overset{c_4}{\int} 
      \mathcal{C}(c_4 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_1  , c_3)
        \otimes_V
      A(c_4 )
  \end{aligned}
  \,,
$$

where

1. the equivalence is [[braiding]] in the integrand (and the [[Fubini theorem]], prop. \ref{CoendsCommuteWithEachOther});

1. the first morphism is, in the integrand, the smash product of 

   1. forming the tensor product of hom-objects of $\mathcal{C}$ with the identity morphism on $c_5$;

   1. the monoidal functor incarnation $A(c_5) \wedge A(c_4)\longrightarrow A(c_5 \otimes_{\mathcal{C}} c_4 )$ of the monoid structure on $A$;

1. the second morphism is, in the integrand, given by composition in $\mathcal{C}$;

1. the last morphism is the morphism induced on [[coends]] by regarding [[extranatural transformation|extranaturality]] in $c_4$ and $c_5$ separately as a special case of extranaturality in $c_6 \coloneqq c_4 \otimes c_5$ (and then renaming).

With this it is fairly straightforward to see that 

$$
  A Mod \simeq [\mathcal{D}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
  \,,
$$

because, by the above definition of composition, functoriality over $\mathcal{D}$ manifestly encodes the $A$-[[action]] property together with the functoriality over $\mathcal{C}$.

This way we are reduced to showing that actually $\mathcal{D} \simeq A Free_{\mathcal{C}}Mod^{op}$. 

But by construction, the image of the objects of $\mathcal{D}$ under the [[Yoneda embedding]] are precisely the free $A$-modules over objects of $\mathcal{C}$:


$$
  \mathcal{D}(c,-)
  \simeq
  A Free_{\mathcal{C}}Mod(-,c) 
  \simeq
  (A \otimes_{Day} y(c))(-)
  \,.
$$ 

Since the [[Yoneda embedding]] is [[fully faithful functor|fully faithful]], this shows that indeed

$$
  \mathcal{D}^{op} \simeq A Free_{\mathcal{C}}Mod \hookrightarrow A Mod
  \,.
$$

=--





+-- {: .num_example #SequentialSpectraAsFunctorsOnFreeSSequModules}
###### Example

For the sequential case $Dia = Seq$ in def. \ref{TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra}, then the opposite category of [[free modules]] on objects in $Seq$ over $\mathbb{S}_{seq} $ ([def.](Introduction+to+stable+homotopy+theory+--+1-1#StandardRepresentativeOfTheSphereSpectrum)) is identified as the category $StdSpheres$ ([def.](Introduction+to+stable+homotopy+theory+--+1-1#CategoriesOfStandardSpheres)):
 

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{seq} Free_{seq}Mod^{op}
   \;\simeq\;
  StdSpheres
$$

Accordingly, in this case prop. \ref{ModulesForDayConvolutionAsEnrichedFunctors} reduces to the identification ([prop.](Introduction+to+stable+homotopy+theory+--+1-1#SequentialSpectraAsDiagramSpectra)) of [[sequential spectra]] as topological diagrams over $StdSpheres$:

$$
  [ \mathbb{S}_{seq} Free_{seq}Mod^{op}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg} ]
    \simeq
  [StdSpheres, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
    \simeq
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
  \,.
$$


=--


+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

There is one object $y(n)$ for each $n \in \mathbb{N}$. Moreover, from the expression in the proof of prop. \ref{ModulesForDayConvolutionAsEnrichedFunctors} we compute the [[hom-spaces]] between these to be

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \mathbb{S}_{seq} Free_{seq}Mod( 
       \mathbb{S}_{seq} \otimes_{Day} y_{k_2}
       ,
       \mathbb{S}_{seq} \otimes_{Day} y_{k_1}
    )
    &  
    \simeq
    \overset{n}{\int} Seq(n + k_1 , k_2) \wedge \mathbb{S}_{seq}(n)
    \\
    &
    \simeq
    \left\{
      \array{
        S^{k_2-k_1} & if \; k_2 \geq k_1
        \\
        \ast & otherwise
      }
    \right.
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

These are the objects and hom-spaces of the category $StdSpheres$. It is straightforward to check that the definition of composition agrees, too.

=--



+-- {: .num_prop #StrictModelStructureOnDiagramSpectra}
###### Proposition

The four categories of 

1. [[pre-excisive functors]] $Exc(Top_{cg})$;

1. [[orthogonal spectra]] $OrthSpec(Top_{cg})$;

1. [[symmetric spectra]] $SymSpec(Top_{cg})$;

1. [[sequential spectra]] $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$

each admit a [[model category]] structure ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ModelCategory)) whose weak equivalences and fibrations are those morphisms which induce on all component spaces weak equivalences or fibrations, respectively, in the [[classical model structure on pointed topological spaces]] $(Top^{\ast/}_{cg})_{Quillen}$. ([thm.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ClassicalModelStructureOnCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpaces), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ModelStructureOnSliceCategory)).
These are called the **strict model structures** (or **level model structures**) on [[structured spectra]]. 

Moreover, under the [[equivalences of categories]] of prop. \ref{SseqModulesAreSequentialSpectra} and prop. \ref{DiagramSpectraGiveSymmetricAndOrthogonalSpectra}, the restriction functors in def. \ref{TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra} constitute [[right adjoints]] of [[Quillen adjunctions]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#QuillenAdjunction)) between these model structures:



$$
 \array{
   Exc(Top_{cg})_{strict} && OrthSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict} && SymSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict} && SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}
   \\
   \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\simeq}}
   && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\simeq}}
   && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\simeq}}
   && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\simeq}}
   \\
   \mathbb{S} Mod_{strict}
   &
     \underoverset
       {\underset{orth^\ast}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\overset{orth_!}{\longleftarrow}}
       {\bot}
   &
   \mathbb{S}_{Orth} Mod_{strict}
   &
     \underoverset
       {\underset{sym^\ast}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\overset{sym_!}{\longleftarrow}}
       {\bot}
   &
   \mathbb{S}_{Sym} Mod_{strict}
   &
     \underoverset
       {\underset{seq^\ast}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\overset{seq_!}{\longleftarrow}}
       {\bot}
   &
   \mathbb{S}_{Seq} Mod_{strict}
  }
  \,.
$$

=--


+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By prop. \ref{ModulesForDayConvolutionAsEnrichedFunctors} all four categories are equivalently categories of pointed [[topologically enriched functors]]

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod
   \simeq
  [ \mathbb{S}_{dia} Free_{dia}Mod, Top^{\ast/}_{cg} ]
$$

and hence the existence of the model structures with componentwise weak equivalences and fibrations is a special case of the general existence of the [[projective model structure on enriched functors]] ([thm.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ProjectiveModelStructureOnTopologicalFunctors)).

The three restriction functors $dia^\ast$ each have a [[left adjoint]] $dia_!$ by topological [[left Kan extension]] (prop. \ref{TopologicalLeftKanExtensionBCoend}).

Moreover, the three right adjoint restriction functors are along inclusions of objects, hence evidently preserve componentwise weak equivalences and fibrations.  Hence these are [[Quillen adjunctions]].

=--



##### Free spectra
 {#FreeSpectra}

The concept of _[[free spectrum]]_ is a generalization of that of _[[suspension spectrum]]_. In fact the [[stable homotopy types]] of free spectra are precisely those of iterated [[loop space objects]] of [[suspension spectra]]. But for the development of the theory what matters is free spectra before passing to stable homotopy types, for as such they play the role of the basic cells for the stable [[model structures on spectra]] analogous to the role of the [[n-spheres]] in the [[classical model structure on topological spaces]] (def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra} below).

Moreover, while free [[sequential spectra]] are just re-indexed [[suspension spectra]], free [[symmetric spectra]] and free [[orthogonal spectra]] in addition come with suitably freely generated [[actions]] of the [[symmetric group]] and the [[orthogonal group]]. It turns out that this is not entirely trivial; it leads to a subtle issue (lemma \ref{AdjunctsOfFreeSpectrumInclusionsAreOrAreNotStableWeakHomotopyEquivalences} below) where the [[adjuncts]] of certain canonical inclusions of free spectra are [[stable weak homotopy equivalences]] for sequential and orthogonal spectra, but _not_ for symmetric spectra.  

+-- {: .num_defn #FreeStructuredSpectrum}
###### Definition

For $Dia \in \{Top^{\ast/}_{fin}, Orth, Sym, Seq\}$ any one of the four diagram shapes of def. \ref{TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra}, and for each $n \in \mathbb{N}$, the functor 

$$
  (-)_n
  \;\colon\;
  \mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod 
    \overset{seq^\ast}{\longrightarrow} \mathbb{S}_{seq}Mod 
  \simeq 
    SeqSpec(Top_{cg}) \stackrel{(-)_n}{\longrightarrow} Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
$$

that sends a [[structured spectrum]] to the $n$th component space of its underlying [[sequential spectrum]] has, by prop. \ref{TopologicalLeftKanExtensionBCoend}, a [[left adjoint]]

$$
  F^{dia}_n \;\colon\; Top^{\ast/} \longrightarrow \mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod
  \,.
$$

This is called the **[[free structured spectrum]]**-functor.

=--

([MMSS 00, section 8](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .num_lemma #ExplicitExpressionForFreeSpectra}
###### Lemma

Let $Dia \in \{Top^{\ast/}_{fin}, Orth, Sym, Seq\}$ be any one of the four diagram shapes of def. \ref{TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra} and consider  the equivalence $\mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod \simeq [\mathbb{S}_{dia}Free_{dia}Mod^{op}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]$ of prop. \ref{ModulesForDayConvolutionAsEnrichedFunctors}. Then

1. the [[free spectrum]] on $K \in Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ is 

   $$
     \begin{aligned}
       F^{dia}_n K
        & \simeq
       y_{Free_{Dia}Mod}(n) \wedge K
       \\
       & \simeq
       \mathbb{S}_{dia}Free_{dia}Mod( - , \mathbb{S}_{dia} \wedge y_{Dia}(n) ) \wedge K
       \end{aligned}
     \,;
   $$

1. on the $\mathbb{S}_{dia}$-[[free module]] on $n' \in Dia^{op} \stackrel{y}{\hookrightarrow} [Dia, Top^{\ast/}]$ this takes the value

  $$
    (F^{dia}_n K)(n')
      \;\simeq\;
    \overset{n_1 \in Dia}{\int}
      Dia(n_1 \otimes n, n') \wedge S^{n_1} \wedge K
    \,.
  $$

=--

([MMSS00, p. 7 with theorem 2.2](#MMSS00))


+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The first statement is a special case of the general fact that for $\mathcal{C}$ a pointed [[topologically enriched category]], and for $c \in \mathcal{C}$ any [[object]], then there is an [[adjunction]]

$$
  [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
    \underoverset
      {\underset{(-)_c}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\overset{y(c)\wedge(-)}{\longleftarrow}}
      {\bot}
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
$$

witnessed by the following composite [[natural isomorphism]]:

$$
  [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](y(c)\wedge K, F)
    \;\simeq\;
  Maps(K, [\mathcal{C}, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}](y(c),  F)  )_\ast
    \;\simeq\;
  Maps(K,F(c))_\ast
   \;=\;
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}(K,F(c))
  \,,
$$

where the first is the isomorphism of [[tensoring]] from prop. \ref{UniversalPropertyOfTensoringAndPoweringOfFunctorsToTopcg}, while the second is the [[enriched Yoneda lemma]] (prop. \ref{YonedaReductionTopological}).

From this, the second statement follows by the proof of prop. \ref{ModulesForDayConvolutionAsEnrichedFunctors}.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #ExplicitFormOfFreeSpectra}
###### Proposition

Explicitly, the [[free spectra]] according to def. \ref{FreeStructuredSpectrum}, look as follows:

For [[sequential spectra]]: $(F^{Seq}_n K)_q \simeq S^{q-n} \wedge K$;

for [[symmetric spectra]]: $(F^{Sym}_n K)_q \simeq \Sigma(q)_+ \wedge_{\Sigma(q-n)} S^{q-n} \wedge K$.

for [[orthogonal spectra]]: $(F^{Orth}_n K)_q \simeq O(q)_+ \wedge_{O(q-n)} \wedge S^{q-n} \wedge K$.

In particular: 

1. $F_0 K = \Sigma^\infty K$;

1. $F_n^{Seq}S^n$ is like the [[suspension spectrum]] of the point (the standard sequential [[sphere spectrum]]) but with its first $n$ components simply removed.


=--

(e.g. [Schwede 12, example 3.20](#Schwede12))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

With the formula in item 2 of lemma \ref{ExplicitExpressionForFreeSpectra} we have for the case of [[orthogonal spectra]]

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    (F_n^{Orth} K)(\mathbb{R}^q)
    & \simeq
    \overset{n_1 \in Orth}{\int}
     \underset{= \left\{ \array{ O(q)_+ & if \, n_1+n = q \\ \ast & otherwise} \right.}{\underbrace{Orth(n_1 + n,q)}} 
       \wedge 
     S^{n_1} 
       \wedge 
     K
    \\
    & \simeq
    \overset{n_1 = \ast \in \mathbf{B}(O(q-n))}{\int}
    O(q)_+ \underset{O(q-n)}{\wedge} S^{q-n} \wedge K
  \end{aligned}
  \,,
$$

where in the second line we used that the coend collapses to $n_1 = q-n$ ranging in the full subcategory 

$$
  \mathbf{B}(O(q-n)_+) \hookrightarrow Orth
$$

on the object $\mathbb{R}^{q-n}$ and then applied example \ref{CoendGivesQuotientByDiagonalGroupAction}. The case of symmetric spectra is verbatim the same, with the symmetric group replacing the orthogonal group, and the case of sequential spectra is again verbatim the same, with the orthogonal group replaced by the trivial group.

=--

One use of free spectra is that they serve to co-represent adjuncts of structure morphisms of spectra. To this end, first consider the following general existence statement.

+-- {: .num_lemma #CorepresentingOfAdjunctsOfStructureMapsExists}
###### Lemma

For each $n \in \mathbb{N}$ there exists a morphism

$$
  \lambda_n
    \;\colon\;
  F_{n+1}^{dia}S^1
    \longrightarrow
  F_n^{dia} S^0
$$

such that for every $X\in \mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod$ precomposition $\lambda_n^\ast$ forms a [[commuting diagram]] of the form

$$
  \array{
    \mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod(F^{dia}_n S^0, X) &\simeq& Top^{\ast/}(S^0,X_n) &\simeq& X_n
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\lambda_n^\ast}}
    && &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\tilde \sigma^X_n}}
    \\
    \mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod(F^{dia}_{n+1} S^1, X)
    &\simeq&
    Top^{\ast/}(S^1, X_{n+1})
    &\simeq&
    \Omega X_{n+1}
  }
  \,,
$$

where the horizontal equivalences are the [[adjunction]] isomorphisms and the canonical identification, and where the right morphism is the $(\Sigma \dashv \Omega)$-[[adjunct]] of the structure map $\sigma_n$ of the [[sequential spectrum]] $seq^\ast X$ underlying $X$ (def. \ref{TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra}).

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Since all prescribed morphisms in the diagram are [[natural transformations]], this is in fact a diagram of copreheaves on $\mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod$

$$
  \array{
    \mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod(F^{dia}_n S^0, -) &\simeq& Top^{\ast/}(S^0,(-)_n) &\simeq& (-)_n
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{}}
    && &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\tilde \sigma^{(-)}_n}}
    \\
    \mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod(F^{dia}_{n+1} S^1, -)
    &\simeq&
    Top^{\ast/}(S^1, (-)_{n+1})
    &\simeq&
    \Omega (-)_{n+1}
  }
  \,.
$$

With this the statement follows by the [[Yoneda lemma]].

=--

Now we say explicitly what these maps are:

+-- {: .num_defn #CorepresentationOfAdjunctsOfStructureMaps}
###### Definition

For $n \in \mathbb{N}$, write

$$
  \lambda_n \;\colon\; F_{n+1} S^1 \longrightarrow F_n S^0
$$

for the [[adjunct]] under the ([[free structured spectrum]] $\dashv$ $n$-component)-[[adjunction]] in def. \ref{FreeStructuredSpectrum} of the composite morphism

$$
  S^1 
    \stackrel{=}{\to}
  (F_n^{Seq}(S^0))_{n+1}
    \stackrel{(f_n^{Seq})_{n+1}}{\hookrightarrow} 
  (F^{dia}_n S^0)_{n+1}
  \,,
$$

where the first morphism is via prop. \ref{ExplicitFormOfFreeSpectra} and the second comes from the adjunction units according to def. \ref{FreeStructuredSpectrum}.

=--

([MMSS 00, def. 8.4](#MMSS00), [Schwede 12, example 4.26](#Schwede12))

+-- {: .num_lemma #IndeedCorepresentationOfAdjunctsOfStructureMaps}
###### Lemma

The morphisms of def. \ref{CorepresentationOfAdjunctsOfStructureMaps} are those whose existence is asserted by prop. \ref{CorepresentingOfAdjunctsOfStructureMapsExists}.
 
=--

([MMSS 00, lemma 8.5](#MMSS00), following [Hovey-Shipley-Smith 00, remark 2.2.12](#HoveyShipleySmith00))


+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Consider the case $Dia = Seq$ and $n = 0$. All other cases work analogously.

By lemma \ref{ExplicitFormOfFreeSpectra}, in this case the morphism $\lambda_0$ has components like so:

$$
  \array{
    \vdots && \vdots
    \\
    S^3 &\stackrel{id}{\longrightarrow}& S^3
    \\
    S^2 &\stackrel{id}{\longrightarrow}& S^2
    \\
    S^1 &\stackrel{id}{\longrightarrow}& S^1
    \\
    \ast &\stackrel{0}{\longrightarrow}& S^0
    \\
    \underbrace{\,\,\,} && \underbrace{\,\,\,}
    \\
    F_1 S^1 &\stackrel{\lambda_0}{\longrightarrow}& F_0 S^0
  }
  \,.
$$

Now for $X$ any sequential spectrum, then a morphism $f \colon F_0 S^0 \to X$ is uniquely determined by its 0th components $f_0 \colon S^0 \to X_0$ (that's of course the very free property of $F_0 S^0$); as the compatibility with the structure maps forces the first component, in particular, to be $\sigma_0^X\circ \Sigma f$:

$$
  \array{
    \Sigma S^0 &\stackrel{\Sigma f}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma X_0
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\simeq}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma_0^X}}
    \\
    S^1 &\stackrel{\sigma_0^X \circ \Sigma f}{\longrightarrow}& X_1
  }
$$

But that first component is just the component that similarly determines the precompositon of $f$ with $\lambda_0$, hence $\lambda_0^\ast f$ is fully fixed as being the map $\sigma_0^X \circ \Sigma f$. Therefore $\lambda_0^\ast$ is the function

$$
  \lambda_0^\ast
  \;\colon\;
  X_0 
  = 
  Maps(S^0, X_0)
  \stackrel{f \mapsto \sigma_0^X \circ \Sigma f}{\longrightarrow}
  \Maps(S^1, X_1)
  =
  \Omega X_1
  \,.
$$

It remains to see that this is the $(\Sigma \dashv \Omega)$-[[adjunct]] of $\sigma_0^X$. By the general formula for adjuncts, this is

$$
  \tilde \sigma_0^X 
    \;\colon\; 
  X_0 
     \stackrel{\eta}{\longrightarrow} 
  \Omega \Sigma X_0
     \stackrel{\Omega \sigma_0^X}{\longrightarrow}
  \Omega X_1
  \,.
$$

To compare to the above, we check what this does on points: $S^0 \stackrel{f_0}{\longrightarrow} X_0$ is sent to the composite

$$
   S^0 
     \stackrel{f_0}{\longrightarrow}
   X_0 
     \stackrel{\eta}{\longrightarrow} 
   \Omega \Sigma X_0
     \stackrel{\Omega \sigma_0^X}{\longrightarrow}
   \Omega X_1
   \,.
$$

To identify this as a map $S^1 \to X_1$ we use the adjunction isomorphism once more to throw all the $\Omega$-s on the right back to $\Sigma$-s the left, to finally find that this is indeed

$$
  \sigma_0^X \circ \Sigma f
    \;\colon\;
  S^1 = \Sigma S^0 \stackrel{\Sigma f}{\longrightarrow} \Sigma X_0 \stackrel{\sigma_0^X}{\longrightarrow} X_1
  \,.
$$

=--


+-- {: .num_lemma #AdjunctsOfFreeSpectrumInclusionsAreOrAreNotStableWeakHomotopyEquivalences}
###### Lemma

The maps $\lambda_n \;\colon\; F_{n+1} S^1 \longrightarrow F_n S^0$  in def. \ref{CorepresentationOfAdjunctsOfStructureMaps} are 

1. [[stable weak homotopy equivalences]] for sequential spectra, symmetric spectra and pre-excisive functors, i.e. for ${Dia} \in \{Top^{\ast/}, Orth, Seq\}$;

1. **not** stable weak homotopy equivalences for the case of symmetric spectra ${Dia} = {Sym}$.

=--

([Hovey-Shipley-Smith 00, example 3.1.10](#HoveyShipleySmith00), [MMSS 00, lemma 8.6](#MMSS00), [Schwede 12, example 4.26](#Schwede12))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof


This follows by inspection of the explicit form of the maps, via prop. \ref{ExplicitFormOfFreeSpectra}. We discuss each case separately:

**sequential case**

Here the components of the morphism eventually stabilize to isomorphisms

$$
  \array{
    & \vdots && \vdots
    \\
    (\lambda_n)_{n+3} & S^3 &\stackrel{id}{\longrightarrow}& S^3
    \\
    (\lambda_n)_{n+2} & S^2 &\stackrel{id}{\longrightarrow}& S^2
    \\
    (\lambda_n)_{n+1} & S^1 &\stackrel{id}{\longrightarrow}& S^1
    \\
    (\lambda_n)_n \colon & \ast &\stackrel{0}{\longrightarrow}& S^0
    \\
    & \ast &\longrightarrow& \ast
    \\
    & \vdots && \vdots
    \\
    & \ast &\longrightarrow& \ast
    \\
    & \underbrace{\,\,\,} && \underbrace{\,\,\,}
    \\
    \lambda_n \colon & F_{n+1} S^1 &\stackrel{}{\longrightarrow}& F_n S^0
  }
$$

and this immediately gives that $\lambda_n$ is an isomorphism on stable homotopy groups.

**orthogonal case**

Here for $q \geq n+1$ the $q$-component of $\lambda_n$ is the [[quotient]] map

$$
  (\lambda_n)_q 
    \;\colon\;
  O(q)_+ \wedge_{O(q-n-1)} S^{q-n}
   \simeq
  O(q)_+ \wedge_{O(q-n-1)} S^1 \wedge S^{q-n-1}
  \longrightarrow
  O(q)_+ \wedge_{O(q-n)}S^{q-n}
  \,.
$$

By the [suspension isomorphism](homotopy+group+of+a+spectrum#SuspensionIsomorphismOfStableHomotopyGroups) for [[stable homotopy groups]], $\lambda_n$ is a stable weak homotopy equivalence precisely if any of its [[reduced suspension|suspensions]] is. Hence consider instead $\Sigma^n \lambda_n \coloneqq S^n \wedge \lambda_n$, whose $q$-component is 

$$
  (\Sigma^n\lambda_n)_q 
    \;\colon\;
  O(q)_+ \wedge_{O(q-n-1)} S^{q}
    \longrightarrow
  O(q)_+ \wedge_{O(q-n)}S^{q}
  \,.
$$

Now due to the fact that $O(q-k)$-action on $S^q$ lifts to an $O(q)$-action, the quotients of the diagonal action of $O(q-k)$ equivalently become quotients of just the left action. Formally this is due to the existence of the [[commuting diagram]]

$$
  \array{
    O(q)_+ \wedge S^q 
     &\stackrel{id}{\longrightarrow}& 
    O(q)_+ \wedge S^q 
     &\stackrel{id}{\longrightarrow}& 
    O(q)_+ \wedge S^q 
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{p_2}}
    \\
    Q(q)_+ \wedge_{Q(q-k)} S^q 
     &\longrightarrow&
    Q(q)_+ \wedge_{Q(q)} S^q
    & \stackrel{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} & S^q
  }
$$

which says that the image of any $(g,s) \in O(q)_+  \wedge S^q$ in the quotient $Q(q)_+ \wedge_{Q(q-k)} S^q$ is labeled by $([g],s)$.

It follows that $(\Sigma^n\lambda_n)_q$ is the smash product of a projection map of [[coset spaces]] with the identity on the sphere:

$$
  (\Sigma^n\lambda_n)_q 
    \simeq
  proj_+ \wedge id_{S^q} 
    \;\colon\;
  O(q)/O(q-n-1)_+ \wedge S^q
    \longrightarrow
  O(q)/O(q-n)_+ \wedge S^{q}
  \,.
$$

Now finally observe that this projection function

$$
  proj
  \;\colon\;
  O(q)/O(q-n-1) 
    \longrightarrow
  O(q)/O(q-n)
$$

is $(q - n -1 )$-connected (see [here](coset+space#CofiberSequencesOfCosetsOfOrthogonalGroups)). Hence its smash product with $S^q$ is $(2q - n -1 )$-connected.

The key here is the fast growth of the connectivity with $q$. This implies that for each $s$ there exists $q$ such that $\pi_{s+q}((\Sigma^n \lambda_n)_q)$ becomes an isomorphism. Hence $\Sigma^n \lambda_n$ is a stable weak homotopy equivalence and therefore so is $\lambda_n$.

**symmetric case**
 
Here the morphism $\lambda_n$ has the same form as in the orthogonal case above, except that all occurences of [[orthogonal groups]] are replaced by just their sub-[[symmetric groups]].

Accordingly, the analysis then proceeds entirely analogously, with the key difference that the projection

$$
  \Sigma(q)/\Sigma(q-n-1) 
    \longrightarrow
  \Sigma(q)/\Sigma(q-n)
$$

does _not_ become highly connected as $q$ increases, due to the [[discrete topological space]] underlying the symmetric group. Accordingly the conclusion now is the opposite: $\lambda_n$ is not a stable weak homotopy equivalence in this case.

=--

Another use of free spectra is that their [[pushout products]] may be explicitly analyzed, and checking the [[pushout-product axiom]] for general cofibrations may be reduced to checking it on morphisms between free spectra.

+-- {: .num_lemma #SmashProductOfFreeSpectra}
###### Lemma

For $A, B \in Top^{\ast/}$ and for $k,\ell \in \mathbb{N}$, then the [[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]], def. \ref{SymmetricSmashProductOfDiagramSpectra}, applied to the corresponding [[free spectra]] from def. \ref{FreeStructuredSpectrum} relates to the plain [[smash product]] of [[pointed topological spaces]] via [[natural isomorphisms]]

$$
  (F_k A)\wedge_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}} (F_\ell B)
  \simeq
  F_{k+\ell}(A\wedge B)
  \,.
$$

=--

([MMSS 00, lemma 1.8, lemma 21.3](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Consider the following sequence of [[natural isomorphisms]]

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    [\mathbb{S}_{dia} Free_{Dia}Mod^{op},Top^{\ast/}]((F_k A)\wedge_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}} (F_\ell B), Z)
    & \simeq
     [\mathbb{S}_{dia} Free_{Dia}Mod^{op}\times \mathbb{S}_{dia} Free_{Dia}Mod^{op}, Top^{\ast/}]((F_k A)\tilde \wedge (F_\ell B), Z \circ \wedge)
    \\
    & \simeq 
    Top^{\ast/}( A\wedge B, F_{k+\ell})
    \\
    & \simeq
    [\mathbb{S}_{dia} Free_{Dia}Mod^{op},Top^{\ast/}](
      F_{k+\ell}(A \wedge B), Z
    )    
  \end{aligned}
  \,,
$$

where we used the adjoint characterization (corollary \ref{DayConvolutionViaNaturalIsosInvolvingExternalTensorAndTensor}) of the [[Day convolution]]. Since this is natural in $Z$, the [[Yoneda lemma]] implies the claim.

=--

+-- {: .num_lemma #PushoutSmashProductOfFreeSpectraOnGeneratingCofibrationsOfTop}
###### Lemma

The [[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]] of the [[free spectrum]] constructions (def. \ref{FreeStructuredSpectrum}) on the generating cofibrations $\{S^{n-1}\overset{i_n}{\hookrightarrow} D^n\}_{n \in \mathbb{B}}$ of the [[classical model structure on topological spaces]] is given by addition of indices

$$
  (F_k i_{n_1}) \Box_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}} (F_\ell i_{n_2})
  \simeq
  F_{k+\ell}( i_{n_1 + n_2})
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By lemma \ref{SmashProductOfFreeSpectra} the [[commuting diagram]] defining the [[pushout product]] of [[free spectra]]

$$
  \array{
    && F_k S^{n_1-1}_+ \wedge_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}} F_{\ell} S^{n_2-1}_+
    \\
    & \swarrow && \searrow
    \\
    F_k D^{n_1}_+ \wedge_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}} F_{\ell} S^{n_2-1}_+
    &&
    &&
    F_k S^{n_1-1}_+ \wedge_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}} F_{\ell} D^{n_2-1}_+
    \\
    & \searrow && \swarrow
    \\
    && F_k D^{n_1-1}_+ \wedge_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}} F_k D^{n_2-1}_+
  }
$$

is equivalent to this diagram:

$$
  \array{
    && F_{k+\ell}((S^{n_1-1}\times S^{n_2-1})_+)
    \\
    & \swarrow && \searrow
    \\
    F_{k+\ell}((D^{n_1} \times S^{n_2-1})_+)
    &&
    &&
    F_{k+\ell}((S^{n_1-1} \times D^{n_2})_+)
    \\
    & \searrow && \swarrow
    \\
    && F_{k+ \ell}( (D^{n_1}\times D^{n_2})_+ )
  }
  \,.
$$

Since the [[free spectrum]] construction is a left adjoint, it preserves pushouts, and so 

$$
  (F_{k}i_{n_1}) 
    \Box_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}}
  (F_{\ell}i_{n_2})
   \simeq
  F_{k + \ell}( i_{n_1} \Box i_{n_2})
   \simeq
  F_{k + \ell}( i_{n_1 + n_2})
 \,,
$$

where in the second step we used [this lemma](pushout-product#PushoutProductOfSpheresInclusionsIntoDisks).

=--








#### The stable model structure on orthogonal spectra
 {#MonoidalStableModelStructure}



+-- {: .num_defn #StableOrthStructureClassesOfMorphisms}
###### Definition

For $OrthSpec(Top_{cg})$ the category of [[orthogonal spectra]] from def. \ref{SsymModuleSymmetricSpectra} we say that

1. an object $X$ is a **structured [[Omega-spectrum]]** if the underlying [[sequential spectrum]] $seq^\ast X$ (def. \ref{TopologicalDiagramCategoriesForSpectra}) is a sequential [[Omega spectrum]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+1-1#OmegaSpectrum))

1. a morphism $f$ is a **[[stable weak homotopy equivalence]]** (or: **$\pi_\bullet$-isomorphism**) if the underlying morphism of [[sequential spectra]] $seq^\ast(f)$ is a [[stable weak homotopy equivalence]] of sequential spectra ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+1-1#StableWeakHomotopyEquivalenceOfSequentialTopologicalSpectra));

1. a morphism $f$ is a **stable cofibration** if it is a cofibration in the strict model structure $OrthSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}$ from prop. \ref{StrictModelStructureOnDiagramSpectra}.

=--

(e.g. [MMSS00, def. 8.3 with the notation from p. 21](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .num_theorem #OrthogonalSpectraStableModelStructure}
###### Theorem

The category $OrthSpec(Top_{cg})$ of [[orthogonal spectra]] carries a [[model category]] structure ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ModelCategory)) where

* the weak equivalences $W_{stable}$ are the [[stable weak homotopy equivalences]] (def. \ref{StableOrthStructureClassesOfMorphisms});

* the cofibrations $Cof_{stable}$ are the cofibrations of the strict model stucture of prop. \ref{StrictModelStructureOnDiagramSpectra};

* the fibrant objects are precisely the [[Omega-spectra]] (def. \ref{StableOrthStructureClassesOfMorphisms}).

Moreover, this is a [[cofibrantly generated model category]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#CofibrantlyGeneratedModelCategory)) with generating (acyclic) cofibrations given in def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra}.

=--

([Mandell-May 02, theorem 4.2](#May02)) 

We give the **proof** [below](#StableModelStructureOnDiagramSpectraProof), after

##### Proof of the model structure

The generating cofibrations and acylic cofibrations are going to be the those induced via [[tensoring]] of representables from the [[classical model structure on topological spaces]] (giving the strict model structure), together with an additional set of morphisms to the generating acylic cofibrations that will force fibrant objects to be Omega-spectra. To that end we need the following little preliminary.


+-- {: .num_defn #ResolutionOfCorepresentationOfAdjunctsOfStructureMaps}
###### Definition

For $n \in \mathbb{N}$ let

$$
  \lambda_n 
    \colon 
   F_{n+1}S^1 
    \overset{k_n \in Cof_{strict}}{\longrightarrow}
    Cyl(\lambda_n)
   \stackrel{\in W_{strict}}{\longrightarrow}
  F_n S^0
$$

be the factorization of the morphism $\lambda_n$ of lemma \ref{CorepresentingOfAdjunctsOfStructureMapsExists} through its [[mapping cylinder]] formed with respect to the standard [[cylinder spectrum]].

Notice that since $F_{n+1}S^1$ is a [[cell spectrum]] (...) this make the first factor $k_n$ a cofibration. But it makes the second factor be not just any weak equivalenct, but a homotopy equivalence.

=--


With this we may state the classes of morphisms that are going to be shown to be the classes of generating (acyclic) cofibrations for the stable model structures:

+-- {: .num_defn #GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra}
###### Definition

Recall the sets

$$
  I_{Top^{\ast/}} \coloneqq \{S^{n-1}_+ \hookrightarrow D^n_+\}_{n \in \mathbb{N}}
$$

$$
  J_{Top^{\ast/}} \coloneqq \{D^n_+ \hookrightarrow (D^n \times I)_+\}_{n \in \mathbb{N}}
$$

of generating cofibrations and generating acyclic cofibrations, respectively, of the [[classical model structure on pointed topological spaces]].

Write

$$
  F^{dia} I_{Top^{\ast/}} 
    \;\coloneqq\; 
  \{ y_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}Free_{Dia}Mod}(x) \wedge i_+ \}_{{x \in \mathbb{S}_{Dia} Free_{Dia}Mod} \atop {i \in I}}
$$

for the class of [[free spectra]], def. \ref{FreeStructuredSpectrum}, on the class $I$ above, which by lemma \ref{ExplicitExpressionForFreeSpectra} is equivalently the set of morphisms arising as the [[tensoring]] with a topological generating cofibration of a [[representable functor|representable]] over the [[site]] $\mathbb{S}_{dia} Free_{Dia}Mod$ (the [[site]] for $\mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod$ from prop. \ref{ModulesForDayConvolutionAsEnrichedFunctors}).
 
Similarly, write

$$
  F^{dia} J_{Top^{\ast/}} 
    \;\coloneqq\; 
  \{ y_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}Free_{Dia}Mod}(x) \otimes j_+ \}_{{x \in \mathbb{S}_{Dia}Free_{Dia}Mod} \atop {j \in J}}
  \,,
$$

for the set of morphisms arising as the [[tensoring]] of a [[representable functor|representable]] with a generating acyclic cofibration of the [[classical model structure on topological spaces]] (with basepoint adjoined).

Finally write 

$$
  K 
  \coloneqq
  F J
  \;\sqcup\;
  \{
    k_n \Box i_+
  \}_{{n \in \mathbb{N}} \atop {i \in I}}
$$

for the [[disjoint union]] of $F J$ with the [[pushout products]] of the resolved maps $k_n$ from def. \ref{ResolutionOfCorepresentationOfAdjunctsOfStructureMaps} with the elements in $I$.

=--

([MMSS 00, def. 9.3](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .num_prop #CofibrantGenerationOfStrictModelStructure}
###### Proposition

The sets $F I$ and $F J$ from def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra} (disregarding the set $K$ there) are, respectively sets of [[generating cofibrations]] and generating acyclic cofibrations for the strict model structure $\mathbb{S}_{Dia}Mod_{strict}$ (prop. \ref{StrictModelStructureOnDiagramSpectra}).

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By prop. \ref{StrictModelStructureOnDiagramSpectra} the strict model structure is equivalently the projective pointed  [[model structure on enriched functors|model structure on topologically enriched functors]]

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{Dia}Mod_{strict} \simeq [\mathbb{S}_{Dia}Free_{Dia}Mod^{op}, Top^{\ast/}]_{proj}
  \,.
$$

With this the statement follows by the proof of [this](classical+model+structure+on+topological+spaces#ProjectiveModelStructureOnTopEnrichedFunctors) theorem.

=--

+-- {: .num_lemma #ElementsOfKAreStableEquivalencesAndStrictCofibrations}
###### Lemma

Every element in $K$ (def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra}) is both:

1. a cofibration with respect to the strict model structure (prop. \ref{StrictModelStructureOnDiagramSpectra});

1. a stable weak homotopy equivalence (def. \ref{StableEquivalencesForDiagramSpectra}).

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof 

First regarding strict cofibrations: By the [[Yoneda lemma]], the elements in $F J$ have [[right lifting property]] against the strict fibrations, hence in particular they are strict cofibrations. Moreover, by [[Joyal-Tierney calculus]], $k_n \Box i_+$ has left lifting against any acyclic strict fibration $f$ precisely if $k_n$ has left lifting against $f^i$. By $\mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod_{strict}$ behaving like a $Top$-[[enriched model category]] for one argument a relative CW-complex, the latter is still a strict acyclic fibration. Since $k_n$ by construction is a strict cofibration, the lifting follows and hence also $k_n \Box i_+$ is a strict cofibration.

Regarding stable weak homotopy equivalences: The morphisms in $F J$ by design are strict weak equivalences, hence they are in particular stable weak homotopy equivalences. Similarly, the morphisms $k_n$ by lemma \ref{AdjunctsOfFreeSpectrumInclusionsAreOrAreNotStableWeakHomotopyEquivalence}and by [[two-out-of-three]] are stable weak homotopy equivalences.

To see that also the pushout products $k_n \Box (i_n)_+$ are stable weak homotopy equivalences. (e.g. [Mandell-May 99, p.46](#May99))

Main point to see is that the smash tensoring $k_n \wedge T$ with a CW-complex $T$ preserves stable weak homotopy equivalences. Then using that $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ is left proper it follows that the pushout of $k_n \wedge T$ along the cofibration $dom(k_n) \wedge i_+$ preserves the weak homotopy equivalence.


=--


The point of the class $K$ in def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra} is to make the following true:

+-- {: .num_lemma #KInjectivesAreAcyclicCofibrations}
###### Lemma

A morphism $f \colon X \to Y$ in $\mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod$ is a $K$-[[injective morphism]] (for $K$ from def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra}) precisely if 

1. it is a fibration in the strict model structure (hence degreewise a fibration)

1. for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$ the [[commuting squares]] of structure map compatibility on the underlying [[sequential spectra]] 

   $$
     \array{
       X_n  &\overset{\tilde\sigma}{\longrightarrow}& \Omega X_{n+1}
       \\
       \downarrow && \downarrow
       \\
       Y_n &\underset{\tilde \sigma}{\longrightarrow}& \Omega Y_{n+1}
     }
   $$

   exhibit [[homotopy pullbacks]].  

=--

([MMSS 00, prop. 9.5](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By prop \ref{CofibrantGenerationOfStrictModelStructure}, lifting against $F J$ alone characterizes strict fibrations, hence degreewise fibrations. Lifting against the remaining [[pushout product]] morphism $k_n \Box i_+$ is, by [[Joyal-Tierney calculus]], equivalent to left lifting $i_+$ against the dual pullback product of $f^{\Box k_n}$, which means that $f^{\Box k_n}$ is a weak homotopy equivalence. But by construction (lemma \ref{CorepresentingOfAdjunctsOfStructureMapsExists}) $f^{\Box k_n}$ is the comparison morphism into the homotopy pullback under consideration. 

=--

+-- {: .num_cor #KInjectivesObjectsAreOmegaSpectra}
###### Corollary

The $K$-[[injective objects]] (for $K$ from def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra}) are precisely the [[Omega-spectra]], def. \ref{StableEquivalencesForDiagramSpectra}.

=--


+-- {: .num_lemma #KInjectiveStableEquivalencesAreStrictEquivalences}
###### Lemma

A morphism in $\mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod$ which is both 

1. a stable equivalence (def. \ref{StableEquivalencesForDiagramSpectra});

1. a $K$-[[injective morphisms]] (with respect to $K$ from def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra}) 

is an acyclic fibration in the strict model structure of prop. \ref{StrictModelStructureOnDiagramSpectra}, hence is degreewise a [[weak homotopy equivalence]] and [[Serre fibration]] of topological spaces;

=--

([MMSS 00, corollary 9.8](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Let $f\colon X \to B$ be both a stable equivalence as well as a $K$-injective morphism. Since $K$ contains, by prop. \ref{CofibrantGenerationOfStrictModelStructure}, the generating acyclic cofibrations for the strict model structure of prop. \ref{StrictModelStructureOnDiagramSpectra}, $f$ is in particular a strict fibration, hence a degreewise fibration. Therefore the fiber $F$ of $f$ is its [[homotopy fiber]] in the strict model structure. 


We claim now that $F \to \ast$ is a stable weak homotopy equivalence. This is because of the long exact sequence


$$
  \pi_{\bullet+1}(X)
    \overset{\pi_{\bullet+1}(f)}{\longrightarrow}
  \pi_{\bullet+1}(Y)
    \overset{}{\longrightarrow}
  \pi_\bullet(F) 
    \longrightarrow 
  \pi_\bullet(X) 
    \overset{\pi_\bullet(f)}{\longrightarrow}
  \pi_\bullet(Y)
$$

and the assumption that $\pi_\bulllet(f)$ is an iso.


Observe also that $F$, being the pullback of a $K$-injective morphisms (by the standard [closure properties](injective+or+projective+morphism#ClosureProperties)) is a $K$-[[injective object]], so that by corollary \ref{KInjectivesObjectsAreOmegaSpectra} $F$ is an Omega-spectrum. Together this implies with prop. \ref{StableEquivalencesBetweenOmegaSpectraAreStrictWeakEquivalences} that $F \to \ast$ is a weak equivalence in the strict model structure, hence degreewise a [[weak homotopy equivalence]]. From this the [[long exact sequence of homotopy groups]] implies that $\pi_{\bullet \geq 1}(f_n)$ is a [[weak homotopy equivalence]] for all $n$ and for each homotopy group in positive degree. 


To deduce the remaining case that also $\pi_0(f_0)$ is an isomorphism, observe that, by assumption of $K$-injectivity, lemma \ref{KInjectivesAreAcyclicCofibrations} gives that $f_n$ is a homotopy pullback (in topological spaces) of $\Omega (f_{n+1})$. But, by the above, $\Omega (f_{n+1})$ is a weak homotopy equivalence, since $\pi_\bullet(\Omega(-)) = \pi_{\bullet+1}(-)$. Therefore $f_n$ is the homotopy pullback of a weak homotopy equivalence and hence itself a weak homotopy equivalence.

=--

+-- {: .num_lemma #RetractsOfRelativeKCellComplexesAreTheStableEquivalencesAndStrictCofibrations}
###### Lemma

For $K$ from def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra}  the [[retracts]] of $K$-[[relative cell complexes]] are precisely the morphisms which are

1. stable weak homotopy equivalences (def. \ref{StableEquivalencesForDiagramSpectra}), 

1. as well as cofibrations with respect to the strict model structure  of prop. \ref{StrictModelStructureOnDiagramSpectra}.

=--

([MMSS 00, prop. 9.9 (i)](#MMSS00))


+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Since all elements of $K$ are stable weak homotopy equivalences and strict cofibrations by lemma \ref{ElementsOfKAreStableEquivalencesAndStrictCofibrations}, it follows that every retract of a relative $K$-cell complex has the same property.

In the other direction, if $f$ is a stable weak homotopy equivalence and a strict cofibration, by the [[small object argument]] it factors $f \colon \stackrel{i}{\to}\stackrel{p}{\to}$ as a relative $K$-cell complex $i$ followed by a $K$-[[injective morphism]] $p$. By the previous statement $i$ is a stable weak homotopy equivalence, and so by assumption and by [[two-out-of-three]] so is $p$. Therefore lemma \ref{KInjectiveStableEquivalencesAreStrictEquivalences} implies that $p$ is a strict acyclic fibration. But then the assumption that $f$ is a strict cofibration means that it has the [[left lifting property]] against $p$, and so the [[retract argument]] implies that $f$ is a retract of the relative $K$-cell complex $i$.


=--

+-- {: .num_cor #KInjectivesAreIndeedTheStableFibrations}
###### Corollary

For $K$ from def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra}  the $K$-[[injective morphisms]] are precisely those which are
[[injective morphism|injective]] with respect to the cofibrations of the strict model structure that are also stable equivalences.

=--

([MMSS 00, prop. 9.9 (ii)](#MMSS00)) 


+-- {: .num_lemma #StableAcyclicFibrationsAreEquivalentlyStrictAcyclicFibrations}
###### Lemma

A morphism in $\mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod$ is both

1. a stable weak homotopy equivalence (def. \ref{StableEquivalencesForDiagramSpectra})

1. [[injective morphism|injective]] with respect to the cofibrations of the strict model structure that are also stable equivalences;

precisely if it is an acylic fibration in the strict model structure (prop. \ref{StrictModelStructureOnDiagramSpectra}).

=--

([MMSS 00, prop. 9.9 (iii)](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Every acyclic fibration in the strict model structure is injective with respect to strict cofibrations by the strict model structure; and it is a stable equivalence by item 1 of prop. \ref{StableEquivalencesBetweenOmegaSpectraAreStrictWeakEquivalences}.

Conversely, a morphism injective with respect to strict cofibrations that are stable weak homotopy equivalences is a $K$-[[injective morphism]] by corollary \ref{KInjectivesAreIndeedTheStableFibrations}, and hence if it is also a stable equivalence then by lemma \ref{KInjectiveStableEquivalencesAreStrictEquivalences} it is a strict acylic fibration.

=--

+-- {: .proof #StableModelStructureOnDiagramSpectraProof}
###### Proof
(of theorem \ref{OrthogonalSpectraStableModelStructure})

The non-trivial points to check are the two [[weak factorization systems]].

That $(cof_{stable}\cap weq_{stable} \;,\; fib_{stable})$ is a weak factorization system follows from lemma \ref{RetractsOfRelativeKCellComplexesAreTheStableEquivalencesAndStrictCofibrations} and the [[small object argument]]. 

By lemma \ref{StableAcyclicFibrationsAreEquivalentlyStrictAcyclicFibrations} the stable acyclic fibrations are equivalently the strict acyclic fibrations and hence the weak factorization system $(cof_{stable} \;,\; fib_{stable} \cap we_{stable})$ is identified with that of the strict model structure $(cof_{strict} \;,\; fib_{strict} \cap we_{strict})$.

=--




##### Monoidal model structure

We now combine the concepts of [[model category]] and [[monoidal category]].


+-- {: .num_defn #MonoidalModelCategory}
###### Definition

A (symmetric) **monoidal model category** is [[model category]] $\mathcal{C}$
equipped with the structure of a  [[closed monoidal category|closed]] [[symmetric monoidal category]] $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, I)$
such that the following two compatibility conditions are satisfied

1. ([[pushout-product axiom]]) For every pair of cofibrations $f \colon X \to Y$ and $f' \colon X' \to Y'$, their [[pushout-product]], hence the induced morphism out of the cofibered [[coproduct]] over ways of forming the tensor product of these objects

   $$
     (X \otimes Y') \coprod_{X \otimes X'} (Y \otimes X')
     \longrightarrow
     Y \otimes Y'
     \,,
   $$

   is itself a cofibration, which, furthermore, is acyclic if $f$ or $f'$ is.

   (Equivalently this says that the [[tensor product]] $\otimes : C \times C \to C$ is a left [[Quillen bifunctor]].)

1. (unit axiom) For every cofibrant object $X$ and every cofibrant resolution $\emptyset \hookrightarrow Q I \stackrel{p_I}{\longrightarrow} \ast$ of the [[tensor unit]] $I$, the resulting morphism

   $$
     Q I \otimes X \stackrel{p_I \otimes X}{\longrightarrow} I\otimes X \stackrel{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} X
   $$ 

  is a weak equivalence.


=--

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

The [[pushout-product axiom]] in def. \ref{MonoidalModelCategory} implies that for $X$ a cofibrant object, then the functor $X \otimes (-)$ preserves cofibrations and acyclic cofibrations.

In particular if the [[tensor unit]] $I$ happens to be cofibrant, then the unit axiom in def. \ref{MonoidalModelCategory} is implied by the pushout-product axiom. 

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #MonoidAxiom}
###### Definition

We say a [[monoidal model category]], def. \ref{MonoidalModelCategory}, satisfies the **[[monoid axiom]]**, def. \ref{MonoidalModelCategory}, if every morphism that is obtained as a [[transfinite composition]] of [[pushouts]] of [[tensor products]] $X\otimes f$ of acyclic cofibrations $f$ with any object $X$ is a weak equivalence.

=--

([Schwede-Shipley 00, def. 3.3.](#SchwedeShipley)).

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

In particular, the axiom in def. \ref{MonoidAxiom} says that for every object $X$ the functor $X \otimes (-)$ sends acyclic cofibrations to weak equivalences.

=--


+-- {: .num_prop #MonoidalStructureOnHomotopyCategoryOfMonoidalModelCategory}
###### Proposition

Let $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes, I)$ be a [[monoidal model category]]. Then the [[left derived functor]] of the tensor product exsists and makes the [[homotopy category of a model category|homotopy category]] into a [[monoidal category]] $(Ho(\mathcal{C}), \otimes^L, \gamma(I))$.

If in in addition $(\mathcal{C}, \otimes)$ satisfies the [[monoid axiom in a monoidal model category|monoid axiom]], then the [[localization]] functor $\gamma\colon \mathcal{C}\to Ho(\mathcal{C})$ carries the structure of a [[lax monoidal functor]]

$$
  \gamma
  \;\colon\;
  (\mathcal{C}, \otimes, I)
   \longrightarrow
  (Ho(\mathcal{C}), \otimes^L , \gamma(I))
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Consider the explicit model of $Ho(\mathcal{C})$ as the category of fibrant-cofibrant objects in $\mathcal{C}$ with left/right-homotopy classes of morphisms between them (discussed at _[[homotopy category of a model category]]_).

A [[derived functor]] exists if its restriction to this subcategory preserves weak equivalences. Now the [[pushout-product axiom]] implies that on the subcategory of cofibrant objects the functor $\otimes$ preserves acyclic cofibrations, and then the preservation of all weak equivalences follows by [[Ken Brown's lemma]]. 

Hence $\otimes^L$ exists and its [[associativity]] follows simply by restriction. It remains to see its [[unitality]].

To that end, consider the construction of the localization functor $\gamma$ via a fixed but arbitrary choice of (co-)fibrant replacements $Q$ and $R$, assumed to be the identity on (co-)fibrant objects. We fix notation as follows:

$$
\emptyset \underoverset{\in Cof}{i_X}{\longrightarrow} Q X \underoverset{\in W \cap Fib}{p_x}{\longrightarrow} X
\;\;\,,\;\;
X \underoverset{\in W \cap Cof}{j_X}{\longrightarrow} R X \underoverset{\in Fib}{q_x}{\longrightarrow} \ast
  \,.
$$

 
Now to see that $\gamma(I)$ is the [[tensor unit]] for $\otimes^L$, notice that in the [[zig-zag]]

$$
  (R Q I) \otimes (R Q X)
    \overset{j_{Q I} \otimes (R Q X)}{\longleftarrow}
  (Q I) \otimes (R Q X)
    \overset{(Q I)\otimes j_{Q X}}{\longleftarrow}
  (Q I) \otimes (Q X)
    \overset{p_I \otimes (Q X)}{\longrightarrow}
  I \otimes Q X
    \simeq
  Q X
$$

all morphisms are weak equivalences: For the first two this is due to the [[pushout-product axiom]], for the third this is due to the unit axiom on a monoidal model category. It follows that under $\gamma(-)$ this zig-zig gives an isomorphism

$$
  \gamma(I) \otimes^L \gamma(X)\simeq \gamma(X)
$$

and similarly for tensoring with $\gamma(I)$ from the right.

To exhibit lax monoidal structure on $\gamma$, we need to construct a [[natural transformation]]

$$
  \gamma(X) \otimes^L \gamma(Y) \longrightarrow \gamma(X \otimes Y)
$$

and show that it satisfies the the appropriate [[associativity]] and [[unitality]] condition.

By the definitions at _[[homotopy category of a model category]]_, the morphism in question is to be of the form

$$
  (R Q X) \otimes (R Q Y) \longrightarrow R Q (X\otimes Y)
$$


To this end, consider the [[zig-zag]]

$$
  (R Q X) \otimes (R Q Y)
   \underoverset{\in Cof \cap W}{j_{Q X} \otimes R Q Y}{\longleftarrow}
  (Q X) \otimes (R Q Y)
    \underoverset{\in Cof \cap W}{(Q X) \otimes  j_{Q Y} }{\longleftarrow}
  (Q X) \otimes (Q Y)
    \overset{p_X \otimes (Q Y)}{\longrightarrow}
  X \otimes (Q Y)
    \overset{Y \otimes p_Y}{\longrightarrow}   
  X \otimes Y
  \,,
$$

and observe that the two morphisms on the left are weak equivalences, as indicated, by the [[pushout-product axiom]] satisfied by $\otimes$.

Hence applying $\gamma$ to this zig-zag, which is given by the two horizontal part of the following digram

$$
  \array{
    (R Q X) \otimes (R Q Y) &\longleftarrow& R( Q X \otimes Q Y ) &\longrightarrow& R Q (X \otimes Y)
    \\
    \uparrow^{\mathrlap{id}} && \uparrow^{\mathrlap{j_{Q X \otimes Q Y}}} && \uparrow^{\mathrlap{j_{Q(X \otimes Y)}}}
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{p_{X\otimes Y}}}
    \\
    (R Q X) \otimes (R Q Y)
     &\underoverset{\in Cof \cap W}{j_{Q X} \otimes j_{Q Y}}{\longleftarrow}&
    (Q X) \otimes (Q Y)
      &\overset{p_X \otimes p_Y}{\longrightarrow}&
    X \otimes Y
  }
  \,,
$$

and inverting the first two morphisms, this yields a natural transformation as required. 


To see that this satisfies associativity if the monoid axiom holds, tensor the entire diagram above on the right with $(R Q Z)$ and consider the following [[pasting]] composite:

$$
  \array{
    (R Q X) \otimes (R Q Y) \otimes (R Q Z) &\longleftarrow& R( Q X \otimes Q Y ) \otimes (R Q Z) &\longrightarrow& (R Q (X \otimes Y)) \otimes (R Q Z)
    \\
    \uparrow^{\mathrlap{id}} && \uparrow^{\mathrlap{j_{Q X \otimes Q Y} \otimes id }} && \uparrow^{\mathrlap{j_{Q(X \otimes Y)}\otimes id }}
    \\
    && && Q(X \otimes Y) \otimes (R Q Z) &\overset{id \otimes j_{Q Z}}{\longleftarrow}& Q(X\otimes Y) \otimes (Q Z)
    \\
       \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id}} 
    && 
      \downarrow^{\mathrlap{p_{(X\otimes Y)} \otimes id }} 
    &(\star)& 
     \downarrow^{\mathrlap{p_{(X \otimes Y)} \otimes id}}
    \\
    (R Q X) \otimes (R Q Y) \otimes (R Q Z)
     &\underoverset{\in Cof \cap W}{j_{Q X} \otimes j_{Q Y} \otimes id}{\longleftarrow}&
    (Q X) \otimes (Q Y) \otimes (R Q Z)
      &\overset{p_X \otimes p_Y \otimes id}{\longrightarrow}&
    X \otimes Y \otimes (R Q Z)
      &\underset{id \otimes j_{Q Z}}{\longleftarrow}&
    X\otimes Y \otimes Q Z 
      &\overset{id \otimes p_Z}{\longrightarrow}& 
    X \otimes Y \otimes Z  
  }
  \,,
$$

Observe that under $\gamma$ the total top [[zig-zag]] in this diagram gives

$$
  (\gamma(X) \otimes^L \gamma(Y)) \otimes^L \gamma(Z)
  \to \gamma(X\otimes Y)\otimes^L \gamma(Z)
  \,.
$$

Now by the [[monoid axiom in a monoidal model category|monoid axiom]] (but not by the pushout-product axiom!), the horizontal maps in the square in the bottom right (labeled $\star$) are weak equivalences. This implies that the total horizontal part of the diagram is a [[zig-zag]] in the first place, and that under $\gamma$ the total top zig-zag is equal to the image of that total bottom zig-zag. But by functoriality of $\otimes$, that image of the bottom zig-zag is 

$$
  \gamma(p_X \otimes p_Y \otimes p_Z) 
  \circ 
  \gamma(j_{Q X} \otimes j_{Q Y} \otimes j_{Q Z})^{-1}
  \,.
$$

The same argument applies to left tensoring with $R Q Z$ instead of right tensoring, and so in both cases we reduce to the same morphism in the homotopy category, thus showing the associativity condition on the transformation that exhibits $\gamma$ as a lax monoidal functor.

=--


+-- {: .num_theorem}
###### Theorem

The stable model structures from theorem \ref{StableModelStructuresOnDiagramSpectra} on the [[categories of modules]] from prop. \ref{HighlyStructuredSpectraAsDayConvolutionSModules}, remark \ref{PreExcisiveFunctorsAreSModules}

$$
  \mathbb{S}Mod_r \simeq [Top_{fin}^{\ast/}, Top^{\ast/}]
$$

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{Orth} Mod_r \simeq OrthSpec(Top)
$$

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{Sym} Mod_r \simeq SymSpec(Top)
$$

are compatible with their [[monoidal category]] structure given by the [[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]] $\wedge$ of def. \ref{SymmetricSmashProductOfDiagramSpectra}, in that $(\mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod_{stable}, \wedge_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}})$ in these cases

1. is a [[stable model category]];

1. satisfying the [[monoid axiom in a monoidal model category]].

=--

([MMSS 00, theorem 12.1 (iii) with prop. 12.3](#MMSS00)) 

We give the proof below (...) after a sequence of lemmas.

+-- {: .num_lemma #PushoutSmashProductOfStableCofibsIsStableCofib}
###### Lemma

The [[pushout product]] of two cofibrations in $\mathbb{S}_{dia}Mod_{stable}$ is again a cofibration.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

A general abstract fact about [[pushout-products]] ([Hovey-Shipley-Smith 00, prop. 5.3.4](#HoveyShipleySmith00), see _[here](pushout-product#PushoutProductOfCofClassIsCofClassOfPushoutProduct)_) is that for $I_1, I_2$ two classes of morphisms in a [[symmetric monoidal category|closed]] [[symmetric monoidal category]] with [[finite limits]] and [[finite colimits]], and writing $I_i Cof$ for their saturated classes, then under [[pushout-product]] $\Box$:

$$
  (I_1 Cof) \Box (I_2 Cof)
  \subset 
  (I_1 \Box I_2) Cof
  \,.
$$

Since the cofibrations of the stable model structure, theorem \ref{StableModelStructuresOnDiagramSpectra}, are elements in


$$
  Cof_{stable} = (F I) Cof
$$

with $F I$ the class of [[free spectra]] on the class of generating cofibrations $I$ of the [[classical model structure on topological spaces]], def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForDiagramSpectra}, this implies in the present case that 

$$
  Cof_{stable} \Box Cof_{stable}
  \subset
  (F I \Box F I) Cof
  \,.
$$

Now lemma \ref{PushoutSmashProductOfFreeSpectraOnGeneratingCofibrationsOfTop} implies that 

$$
  F I \Box F I
  =
  F(I \Box I)
  =
  F I 
$$

and hence the claim follows.

=--



+-- {: .num_lemma }
###### Lemma

Let $Y \in \mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod_{stable}$ be cofibrant.
Then the [[smash product of spectra]]-[[functor]] (def. \ref{SymmetricSmashProductOfDiagramSpectra})

$$
  X \wedge_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}}(-)
    \;\colon\;
  \mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod
    \longrightarrow
  \mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod
$$

preserves [[stable weak homotopy equivalences]] as well as stable equivalences (def. \ref{StableEquivalencesForDiagramSpectra}).

=--

([MMSS 00, prop. 12.3](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .num_lemma }
###### Lemma

The functor

$$
  X \wedge_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}}(-)
    \;\colon\;
  \mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod
    \longrightarrow
  \mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod
$$

sends acylic cofibrations in the stable model structure to morphisms that are stable equivalences and [[h-cofibrations]].

=--

([MMSS 00, prop. 12.5](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .num_prop #StableModelStructureWithSymmetricMonoidalSmashProductSatisfiesPushoutProductAxiom}
###### Proposition

The [[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]] $\wedge_{\mathbb{S}_{dia}}$ on $\mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod$, def. \ref{SymmetricSmashProductOfDiagramSpectra} satisfies the [[pushout-product axiom]] with respect to the stable model structure $\mathbb{S}_{dia} Mod$ of theorem \ref{StableModelStructuresOnDiagramSpectra}.

=--

([MMSS 00, prop. 12.6](#MMSS00))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

That the pushout product of two stable cofibrations is again a stable cofibration is the content of lemma \ref{PushoutSmashProductOfStableCofibsIsStableCofib}. It remains to show that if at least one of them is a stanble equivalence, def. \ref{StableEquivalencesForDiagramSpectra}, then so is the pushout-product.
That follows with a laborious argument using the above lemmas (...).

=--

(...)




## Related concepts

[[model structure on spectra]]

* [[sequential spectrum]], [[model structure on sequential spectra]]

with [[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]]

* [[symmetric spectrum]], [[model structure on symmetric spectra]]

* [[orthogonal spectrum]], **model structure on orthogonal spectra**

* [[S-module]], [[model structure on S-modules]]

* [[excisive functor]], [[model structure on excisive functors]]

* [[Model categories of diagram spectra]]

[[model structure on ring spectra]]

## References

The model structure on orthogonal spectra and its [[Quillen equivalence]] to the [[model structure on sequential spectra]], the [[model structure on symmetric spectra]] and the [[model structure on excisive functors]] is due to

* {#MMSS00} [[Michael Mandell]], [[Peter May]], [[Stefan Schwede]], [[Brooke Shipley]],  _[[Model categories of diagram spectra]]_,   Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society Volume 82, Issue 2, 2000 ([pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/PAPERS/mmssLMSDec30.pdf), [publisher](http://plms.oxfordjournals.org/content/82/2/441.short?rss=1&ssource=mfc))

The further Quillen equivalence to the [[model structure on S-modules]] is due to 

* {#May02} [[Michael Mandell]], [[Peter May]], _Orthogonal spectra and $S$-modules_, Memoirs of the AMS,number 755 (2002) ([K-theory:0318](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/K-theory/0318/), [pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/PAPERS/mmLMSDec30.pdf))

The analogous result for [[equivariant spectra]] is in

* {#May99} [[Michael Mandell]], [[Peter May]], _Equivariant orthogonal spectra and S-modules_, Memoirs of the AMS 2002  ([pdf](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/K-theory/0408/MMM.pdf))

The $\mathbb{S}$-model structure on orthogonal spectra:

* Martin Stolz, around prop. 1.3.10 of _Equivariant Structure on Smash Powers of Commutative Ring Spectra_, 2011  ([pdf](https://www.math.rochester.edu/people/faculty/doug/otherpapers/mstolz.pdf))

The analogous [[model structure on symmetric spectra]] is due to

* {#HoveyShipleySmith00} [[Mark Hovey]], [[Brooke Shipley]], [[Jeff Smith]], _Symmetric spectra_, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 13 (2000), 149-208 ([arXiv:math/9801077](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/9801077))


