+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A [[topological space]] is called _extremally disconnected_ if the [[closure]] of any [[open subset]] is still an open subset, 
or, equivalently, the closures of disjoint open subsets are disjoint.

=--



## Properties

### As projective objects

\begin{theorem}\label{GleasonTheorem}
**([Gleason 1958](#Gleason58))** 
\linebreak
Extremally disconnected topological spaces are precisely the [[projective objects]] in the [[category]] of [[compact topological space|compact]] [[Hausdorff topological spaces]], and in fact in 
the category of [[topological spaces]] and [[proper maps]] between them.
\end{theorem}

See e.g. ([Bhatt-Scholze 13, below theorem 1.8](BhattScholze13)).
For the second part see [Strauss 1967](#Strauss67).


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

For $R$ a [[w-contractible ring]], the [[profinite set]] $\pi_0(Spec R)$
is an extremally disconnected [[profinite set]].

=--

Part of ([Bhatt-Scholze 13, theorem 1.8](#BhattScholze13)).


### In terms of logic

\begin{remark}
The extremal disconnectedness of a space is correlated with the property that the [[frame of opens|frame of its open subsets]] is a [[De Morgan Heyting algebra]] hence with the validity of the [[De Morgan law]] in [[logic]], since a result by Johnstone says that a [[topos]] $Sh(X)$ [[category of sheaves|of sheaves]] on a [[topological space]] $X$ is a [[De Morgan topos]] precisely when $X$ is extremally disconnected and this implies that all [[subobject lattices]] $sub(X)$ are De Morgan Heyting algebras, in particular $sub(1)$ corresponding to the frame of opens of $X$ (cf. [[De Morgan topos]] for details and references).
\end{remark}


### As a lifting property
 {#AsALiftingProperty}


Being extremally disconnected is equivalently a [[lifting property]] with respect to a surjective proper morphism of [[finite topological spaces]] (for more see the discussion at *[[separation axioms in terms of lifting properties]]*):



Namely that a topological space $X$ is extremally disconnected means equivalently that it solves the following lifting problems (from [[separation axioms in terms of lifting properties#IllustrationOfLiftingForExtremallyDisconnected|here]]):


\begin{tikzcd}
[
  column sep={between origins, 50pt},
  row sep={between origins, 40pt}
]
 \emptyset
  \ar[
    rr,
    "{ }"
  ]
  \ar[dd]
  && \boxed{
\boxed{{}^{\boxed{u}}\!\! \searrow_{\,c_1}} \,\,\, \boxed{{}_{c_2}\swarrow^{\boxed{v}}}
}
   \ar[dd]
  \\
  \\
  X
  \ar[
    rr,
    "{ \forall }"{below}
  ]
  \ar[
    uurr,
    dashed,
    "{ \exists }"
  ]
  &&
  \boxed{
    \overset{
      \boxed{
        \boxed{u}
        \;\;
        \,
        \;\;
        \boxed{v}}
      }{
        \underset{
           c
        }
        {
          \searrow \;\, \swarrow
        }
      }
  }
\end{tikzcd}

Here boxes indicate [[open subsets]] in a [[finite topological space]], and an arrow $x\to c$ means that $c$ is in the [[topological closure|closure]] of $x$. See at *[Background and notation](separation+axioms+in+terms+of+lifting+properties#BackgroundAndNotation)* for more.

One may deduce Gleason's theorem (Prop. \ref{GleasonTheorem}) in terms of these lifting properties:

Both being surjective and being proper are right lifting properties. 
Hence, the existence of a [[weak factorization system]] generated by this morphism implies that each space admits a surjective proper map from an extremally disconnected space. 

For more see at *[[separation axioms in terms of lifting properties]]* the section *[extremally disconnected spaces being projective](separation+axioms+in+terms+of+lifting+properties#ExtremallyDisconnectedSpacesBeingProjective)*.






## Examples

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

For $S$ any [[set]] regarded as a [[discrete topological space]],
its [[Stone-Cech compactification]] is extremally disconnected.

=--

(e.g. [Bhatt-Scholze 13, example 2.4.6](#BhattScholze13))

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Counter-Example

The [[profinite set]] underlying the [[p-adic integers]], regarded as a [[Stone space]], is _not_ extremally disconnected.

=--

(e.g. [Bhatt-Scholze 13, example 2.4.7](#BhattScholze13))


## Related concepts

* [[totally disconnected space]]

* [[De Morgan topos]]

## References

The result on projective spaces stems from

* {#Gleason58} [[Andrew M. Gleason]], _Projective topological spaces_, Ill. J. Math. **2** no.4A (1958) pp.482-489. ([euclid:ijm/1255454110](https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.ijm/1255454110))

* {#Strauss67} D. P. Strauss,  (1967). _Extremally Disconnected Spaces._ Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 18(2), 305. [doi:10.2307/2035286] (https://doi.org/10.2307/2035286)


Textbook account:

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _[[Stone Spaces]]_

Discussion in the context of the [[pro-etale site]]:

* {#BhattScholze13} [[Bhargav Bhatt]], [[Peter Scholze]], _The pro-&#233;tale topology for schemes_ ([arXiv:1309.1198](http://arxiv.org/abs/1309.1198))
 



[[!redirects extremally disconnected topological spaces]]


[[!redirects extremally disconnected profinite set]]
[[!redirects extremally disconnected profinite sets]]


[[!redirects extremally disconnected space]]
[[!redirects extremally disconnected spaces]]
[[!redirects extremally disconnected]]
