__Riemann-Birkhoff factorization/decomposition__ is a realization of a holomorphic matrix function of a circle as a product of a matrix holomorphic on a neighborhood of closed disk and a function of a matrix holomorphic on a neighborhood of an exterior of the disk including infinity and the circle itself. This decomposition is in the essence of
Riemann-Hilbert problem. The interpretation in terms of loop groups is related to Bruhat decomposition. 

There is an algebraic Birkhoff decomposition discovered in the study of
Connes-Kreimer Hopf algebraic approach to renormalization in QFT.

## References

Related $n$Lab entries: [[loop group]], [[Riemann-Hilbert problem]], [[Wiener-Hopf decomposition]]

* wikipedia [Birkhoff factorization](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birkhoff_factorization), [Birkhoff–Grothendieck theorem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birkhoff%E2%80%93Grothendieck_theorem)
* [[eom]]: [Birkhoff factorization](http://www.encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php/Birkhoff_factorization) 
* G. D. Birkhoff, _The generalized Riemann problem for linear differential equations and the allied problems for linear difference and q-difference equations_, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts and Sci. __49__ (1913), 531-568.
* G. Segal, A. Pressley, _Loop groups_, Oxford University Press
* I. Z. Gohberg, M. G. Krein, _Systems of integral equations on a half-line with kernels depending on the difference of the arguments_, Transl. Amer. Math. Soc. __14__ (1960) pp. 217–284
* K. F. Clancey, I. Z. Gohberg, _Factorization of matrix functions and singular integral operators_, Birkhäuser (1981) 
[[!redirects Birkhoff factorization]]
[[!redirects Riemann-Birkhoff decomposition]]
[[!redirects Riemann-Birkhoff factorization]]