[[!redirects Lawverian formalization of Hegelian metaphysics]]



**Abstract** While [[analytic philosophy]] famously rejected the
speculative [[metaphysics]] of [[Hegel]] in favor of the analysis of concepts by means of [[mathematical logic]], in particular [[predicate logic]], recent developments in the [[foundations of mathematics]]  via [[homotopy type theory]] offer a way to re-read [[Hegel]] as having useful formal meaning not in predicate logic, but in '[[modal type theory]]'. The essence of this suggestion has been made by [[Lawvere]] in 1991, which however remains largely unnoticed. Here we aim to give a transparent account of this perspective both philosophically as well as [[category theory|category-theoretically]]. We then further expand on
Lawvere's formalization of Hegel's "[[Science of Logic]]" in terms of the [[categorical semantics]] given by [[cohesive (infinity,1)-topos|cohesive higher toposes]]. We discuss how there is a _useful_ formalization of a fair bit of modern fundamental [[physics]], in fact of [[quantum field theory]], to be found here.


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Introduction

(...)
With the rise of analytic philosophy in Britain and its adoption and development of the new logic forged by Frege and Peano, came a radical rejection of the existing philosophical paradigm, the idealism of T. H. Green and F. H. Bradley, and those considered to have provided its primary source, notable Hegel. Bertrand Russell was adamant that the new logic would thoroughly transform philosophy, as he made clear at the end of his chapter _Logic As The Essence Of Philosophy_:

>The old logic put thought in fetters, while the new logic gives it wings. It has, in my opinion, introduced the same kind of advance into philosophy as Galileo introduced into physics, making it possible at last to see what kinds of problems may be capable of solution, and what kinds are beyond human powers. And where a solution appears possible, the new logic provides a method which enables us to obtain results that do not merely embody personal idiosyncrasies, but must command the assent of all who are competent to form an opinion. (Logic As The Essence Of Philosophy, 1914)

In the same chapter Hegel was taken to task for his attempt to widen logic to a form of metaphysics. Much of it appears to Russell to result from muddled thinking, for instance, a failure to distinguish the 'is' of predication from the 'is' of identity.

This set the tone for the analytic philosophy's opinion of Hegel for several decades. In 1951, the logical empiricist [[Hans Reichenbach]] wrote

>Hegel has been called the successor of Kant; that is a serious misunderstanding of Kant and an unjustified elevation of Hegel. Kant’s system, though proved untenable by later developments, was the attempt of a great mind to establish rationalism on a scientific basis. Hegel’s system is the poor construction of a fanatic who has seen one empirical truth and attempts to make it a logical law within the most unscientific of all logics. Whereas Kant’s system marks the peak of the historical line of rationalism, Hegel’s system belongs in the period of decay of speculative philosophy which characterizes the nineteenth century. (Reichenbach 1951, p. 72)

However, despite the initial lengthy rejection of Hegelian ideas by analytic philosophy, there have recently been increasing signs of a willingness to re-engage with Hegel's writings, in particular on the part of John MacDowell and Robert Brandom (Redding, 2007). Interestingly, one feature of analytic philosophy which needs reconsidering according to Redding is the primacy of first-order predicate logic, not, however, that he is promoting an alternative formalisation. 

It took a mathematician [[Wiliam Lawvere]] to find something formalizable of value in Hegel's _Logic_, in particular the concept of a 'Unity of Opposites'. In this paper, taking our lead from Lawvere in seeing common elements between categorical logic and Hegel's logic, we will pursue this connection right up to modal forms of homotopy type theory.
(...)

## References

* [[Georg Hegel]], _[[Science of Logic]]_ (1812)

* [[William Lawvere]], _[[Some Thoughts on the Future of Category Theory]]_ (1991)

* [[William Lawvere]] _[[Cohesive Toposes and Cantor's "lauter Einsen"]]_ (1994)

* [[William Lawvere]] _[[Unity and Identity of Opposites in Calculus and Physics]]_ (1996)

* [[Higher toposes of laws of motion]]

* [[schreiber:Type-semantics for quantization]]

* Paul Redding, _Analytic Philosophy and the Return of Hegelian Thought_, Cambridge University Press, 2007 ([review](http://ndpr.nd.edu/news/23465-analytic-philosophy-and-the-return-of-hegelian-thought/) by Willem A. deVries)

* [[Bertrand Russell]], 'Logic As The Essence Of Philosophy', chap. 2 of _Our Knowledge of the External World_, (1914)

* Hans Reichenbach, 'The Rise of Scientific Philosophy', 1951.
