
> This page is about the concept in [[mathematics]]. For the concept of the same name in [[philosophy]] see at _[[category (philosophy)]]_.

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

* A category consists of a collection of things and binary relationships (or transitions) between them, such that these relationships can be combined and include the "identity" relationship "is the same as."

* A category is a [[quiver]] (a [[directed graph]] with multiple edges) with a rule saying how to _compose_ two edges that fit together to get a new edge.  Furthermore, each vertex has an edge starting and ending at that vertex, which acts as an identity for this composition.

* A category is a combinatorial model for a [[directed space]] -- a "directed [[homotopy 1-type]]" in some sense.  It has "points", called _objects_, and also directed "paths", or "processes" connecting these points, called _morphisms_.  There is a rule for how to compose paths; and for each object there is an identity path that starts and ends there.

* More precisely, a category consists of a collections of [[object|objects]] and
a collection of [[morphism|morphisms]].  Every morphism 
has a [[source]] object and a [[target]] object.  If $f$ is a morphism with $x$ as its source and $y$ as its target,
we write
$$f : x \to y$$
and we say that $f$ is a morphism from $x$ to $y$.  In a category, we can [[composition|compose]] a morphism $g : x \to y$ and a morphism $f : y \to z$ to get a morphism $f \circ g : x \to z$.  Composition is associative and satisfies the left and right unit laws.

The example to keep in mind is the category [[Set]], in which the objects are sets and a morphism $f : x \to y$ is a function from the set $x$ to the set $y$.  Here composition is the usual composition of functions.

For more background on and context for categories see

* [[category theory]].


## Definitions

There are two broad ways to write down the definition of category; in the usual [[foundations of mathematics]], these two definitions are equivalent.  It is good to know both, for several reasons:

*  Each introduces its own system of notation, both of which are useful in other parts of category theory, so one should know them.
*  One definition generalises quite nicely to the notion of [[internal category]], while the other generalises quite nicely to the notion of [[enriched category]]; these are both important concepts.
*  When examining alternative foundations, sometimes one definition or the other may be more appropriate; in any case, one will want to examine the question of their equivalence.

The two definitions may be distinguished by whether they use a single collection of all [[morphisms]] or several collections of morphisms, a [[family of sets|family of collections]] indexed by pairs of [[objects]].


### With one collection of morphisms

A __category__ $C$ consists of 

*  a [[collection]] (see [Size issues](#size)) $C_0$ of __[[objects]]__;

*  a collection $C_1$ of __[[morphisms]]__ (or __arrows__);

*  two [[functions]] $s, t\colon C_1 \to C_0$ which assign, to every morphism, its __[[source]]__ (or __domain__) and __[[target]]__ (or __codomain__);

*  a [[partial function]] $\circ\colon C_1 \times C_1 \to C_1$ which assigns, to any pair of morphisms $f, g$ such that $t(f) = s(g)$, their __[[composite]]__ morphism $g \circ f \in C_1$ (also  written $g f$ or sometimes $f;g$&mdash; see [[diagrammatic order]]);

*  a function $id\colon C_0 \to C_1$ which assigns to each object $x$ a morphism $id_x$ or $1_x$, the __[[identity morphism]]__ on $x$;

*  such that the following properties are satisfied:

   *  source and target are respected by composition: $s(g \circ f) = s(f)$ and $t(g\circ f) = t(g)$;

   *  source and target are respected by identities: $s(1_x) = x$ and $t(1_x) = x$;

   *  composition is [[associative]]:
      $(h \circ g)\circ f = h\circ (g \circ f)$ whenever $t(f) = s(g)$ and $t(g) = s(h)$;

   *  composition satisfies the [[unit law|left and right unit laws]]:
      if $s(f) = x$ and $t(f) = y$, then $1_y \circ f = f = f \circ 1_x$.

People also often write $x \in C$ instead of $x \in C_0$ as a short way to indicate that $x$ is an object of $C$.  Also, some people write $Ob(C)$ and $Mor(C)$ instead of $C_0$ and $C_1$.  One usually writes $f\colon x \to y$ if $f \in C_1$ to state that $s(f) = x$ and $t(f) = y$.  Finally, people often write $hom(x,y)$, $hom_C(x,y)$, or $C(x,y)$ for the collection of morphisms $f\colon x \to y$.

If the [[identity]]-assigning map and its axiom is omitted, then one speaks of a _[[semicategory]]_.


### With a family of collections of morphisms

A __category__ $C$ consists of 

*  a [[collection]] (see [Size issues](#size)) $C_0$ of __[[objects]]__;

*  for each pair $x,y$ of objects, a collection $C_1(x,y)$ of __[[morphisms]] from $x$ to $y$__;

*  for each triple $x,y,z$ of objects, a [[function]] $\circ\colon C_1(y,z) \times C_1(x,y) \to C_1(x,z)$ which assigns, to any appropriate pair of morphisms $f, g$, their __[[composite]]__ morphism $g \circ f$ (also  written $g f$ or sometimes $f;g$&mdash; see [[diagrammatic order]]);

*  for each object $x$, an [[element]] $id_x$ or $1_x$ of $C_1(x,x)$, the __[[identity morphism]]__ on $x$;

*  such that the following properties are satisfied:

   *  composition is [[associative]]:
      for each quadruple $w,x,y,z$ of objects, if $f \in C_1(y,z)$, $g \in C_1(x,y)$, and $h \in C_1(w,x)$, then $(f \circ g)\circ h = f\circ (g \circ h)$;

   *  composition satisfies the [[unit law|left and right unit laws]]:
      for each pair $x,y$ of objects, if $f \in C_1(x,y)$, then $1_y \circ f = f = f \circ 1_x$.

People also often write $x \in C$ instead of $x \in C_0$ as a short way to indicate that $x$ is an object of $C$.  Also, some people write $Ob(C)$ instead of $C_0$ and $hom(x,y)$, $hom_C(x,y)$, or $C(x,y)$ instead of $C_1(x,y)$.  One usually writes $f\colon x \to y$ to state that $f \in C_1(x,y)$.  Finally, people often write $C_1$ or $Mor(C)$ for the [[disjoint union]] $\biguplus_{x \in C_0} \biguplus_{y \in C_0} C_1(x,y)$.


### Size issues
{#size}

We said a category has a 'collection' of objects and 'collection'(s) of morphisms.  A category is said to be [[small category|small]] if these collections are all [[sets]] &mdash; as opposed to [[proper class|proper classes]], for example.  (The alternatives depend on ones [[foundations|foundations for mathematics]].)

Similarly, a category is [[locally small category|locally small]] if $C_1(x,y)$ is a set for every pair of objects $x,y$ in that category.  The most common motivating examples of categories are all locally small but not small (unless one restricts their objects in some way).


### Alternative definitions

For some purposes it is useful or necessary to vary the way the ordinary definition of category is expressed. See

* [[single-sorted definition of a category]] -- a variant of the first definition, with only _one_ collection at all ($C_1$, no $C_0$). This is sometimes convenient for technical reasons.

* [[type-theoretic definition of category]] -- a variant of the second definition, interpreted explicitly in [[dependent type theory]].

The first definition, with a single collection $C_1$ of morphisms, generalises to the notion of [[internal category]]; essentially, we define a category internal to (some other category) $D$ as above, with 'collection' interpreted as an object of $D$ and 'function' interpreted as a morphism of $D$.  In particular, a category internal to [[Set]] is the same thing as a small category.

### Equivalent definitions
 {#EquivalenceDefinitions}
 {#EquivalentDefinitions}


A [[category]] is equivalently 

* a [[monad]] in the [[2-category]] of [[spans]] of [[sets]];

* a [[monoid]] in the [[monoidal category]] of endospans on the set of objects;

* a [[simplicial set]] which satisfies the [[Segal conditions]];

* a [[simplicial set]] which satisfies the [[weak Kan complex]] conditions strictly:

* hence a [[directed homotopy type theory|directed homotopy type]] which is "1-truncated";


* 


### Generalizations

#### Enriched categories

The definition, of a category as a family $C_1(x,y)$ of collections of morphisms, generalises to the notion of [[enriched category]]: we define a category enriched over (some other category) $D$ as above, with the collection of objects still a 'collection' as before, but with objects of $D$ in place of the collections of morphisms and morphisms of $D$ in place of the various functions.  In particular, a category enriched over [[Set]] is the same thing as a locally small category.

#### Indexed categories

The notion of [[indexed category]] captures the idea of woking "over a base" other than [[Set]].


#### Multicategories

There is a rather obvious generalization of the notion of catgeory where one allows a morphism to go from several objects to a single object. This is called a [[multicategory]] or [[operad]]. See also _[[polycategory]]_ and _[[PROP]]_.

#### Higher categories

See [[higher category theory]].

## Examples

There is the beginning of a [[database of categories]] listing well-known categories (with links to articles on these categories, if such articles exist) and some of their properties. 

The classic example of a category is [[Set]], the category with [[set]]s as objects and [[function]]s as morphisms, and the usual composition of functions as composition.  Here are some other famous examples, which arise as variations on this theme:

* [[Vect]] - [[vector space]]s as objects, linear maps as morphisms.

* [[Grp]] - [[group]]s as objects, homomorphisms as morphisms.

* [[Top]] - [[topological space]]s as objects, continuous functions as morphisms.

* [[Diff]] - smooth [[manifold]]s as objects, smooth maps as morphisms.

* [[Ring]] - [[ring]]s as objects, ring homomorphisms as morphisms.

Note that in all these cases the morphisms are actually special sorts of functions. these are [[concrete categories]].  That need not be the case in general!

These classic examples are the original motivation for the term "category": all of the above categories encapsulate one "kind of mathematical structure".  These are often called "concrete" categories (that term also has a [[concrete category|technical definition]] that these examples all satisfy).  But just as widespread in applications as these categorization examples of categories are are other categories (often "[[small category|small]]" ones) which, roughly, model something like _states_ and _processes_ of some system.

* **Poset** A [[partial order|poset]] can be thought of as a category with its elements as objects and one morphism in each $hom(x,y)$ if $x$ is less than or equal to $y$, but none otherwise.  

* **Group** A [[group]] is just a category where there's one object and all the morphisms have inverses - we call the morphisms "elements" of the group.  This may seem weird, but it's actually a very useful viewpoint. Here's another way to say it: _A group is a [[groupoid]] with a single object_.

* **Monoid** More generally, a [[monoid]] is a category with a single object. In fact, this is one way to motivate the concept of categories: categories are the [[horizontal categorification|many object version]] of monoids.

* **Groupoid** A [[groupoid]] is a category in which all morphisms are [[isomorphism]]s.

* **Quiver** A [[quiver]] may be identified with the [[free category]] on its [[directed graph]].  Given a directed graph $G$ with collection of vertices $G_0$ and collection of edges $G_1$, there is the _[[free functor|free]] category_ $F(G)$ on the graph whose collection of objects coincides with the collection of vertices, and whose collection of morphisms consists of finite sequences of edges in $G_1$ that fit together head-to-tail. The composition operation in this free category is the concatenation of sequences of edges.

* **Universal structure** A category bearing a structure making it [[initial object|initial]] (or 2-initial) in some [[doctrine]]. Examples include the [[permutation category]] as the free symmetric monoidal category generated by a single object, or the [[simplex category]] which is initial among monoidal categories equipped with a monoid. 

## Basic notions

A homomorphism between categories is a [[functor]]. 

This way [[small categories]] themselves form a category, the category [[Cat]] whose objects are small categories and whose morphisms are functors. This naturally enhances to a [[2-category]] whose [[2-morphism]]s are [[natural transformation]]s between functors.

An [[equivalence of categories]] is an equivalence in [[Cat]], hence a pair of functors going back and forth, that are each others inverse up to [[natural isomorphism]].

Weaker than the notion of a pair of functors exhibiting an equivalence is the notion of a pair of [[adjoint functor]]s.

Other standard operations on categories include

* [[opposite category]]

* [[localization]]

* [[geometric realization of categories]]

## Related concepts

* [[continuous category]]

* [[enriched category]]


* [[0-category]], [[(0,1)-category]]

* **category**

  [[semicategory]]

* [[2-category]]

* [[3-category]]

* [[n-category]]

* [[(∞,0)-category]]

* [[(n,1)-category]]

* [[(∞,1)-category]]

* [[(∞,2)-category]]

* [[(∞,n)-category]]

* [[(n,r)-category]]


## References

The standard textbook is

* [[Saunders MacLane]], _[[Categories Work|Categories for the working mathematician]]_

Expositions include

* Jaap van Oosten, [Basic category theory] (http://www.math.uu.nl/people/jvoosten/syllabi/catsmoeder.pdf).

* Andrea Schalk and H. Simmons, [An introduction to category theory in four easy movements](http://www.cs.man.ac.uk/~hsimmons/BOOKS/CatTheory.pdf), notes for a course offered as part of the MSc. in Mathematical Logic, Manchester University.

* Daniele Turim, [Category theory lecture notes](http://www.dcs.ed.ac.uk/home/dt/CT/categories.pdf), 1996-2001.  Based on Mac Lane's book (1998).

* A. Martini, H. Ehrig, and D. Nunes, [Elements of basic category theory](http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/martini96element.html), Technical Report 96-5, Technical University Berlin.

A textbook with an eye towards the theory of [[categories of sheaves]] and their application in [[homological algebra]] is

* Kashiwara, Shapira, _[[Categories and Sheaves]]_

The definition of categories in the [[foundations]] of [[homotopy type theory]] (hence via the notion of [[internal category in an (infinity,1)-category]]) is discussed in 

* {#AhrensKapulkinShulman13} Benedikt Ahrens, [[Chris Kapulkin]], [[Michael Shulman]], _Univalent categories and the Rezk completion_ ([arXiv:1303.0584](http://arxiv.org/abs/1303.0584))

* [[Jason Gross]], [[Adam Chlipala]], [[David Spivak]], _Experience Implementing a Performant Category-Theory Library in Coq_ ([arXiv:1401.7694](http://arxiv.org/abs/1401.7694))

For more references see [[category theory]].

[[!redirects category]]
[[!redirects categories]]
[[!redirects Category]]
[[!redirects Categories]]