
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Philosophy
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include philosophy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

This page collects links related to the text

* [[Ludwig Wittgenstein]], 

  _Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus_ (1921)

  ([Wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tractatus_Logico-Philosophicus))

which deals with [[ontology]] and [[formal logic]] but, arguably, also is concerned with ethics as pointed out by ([Cora Diamond](#Diamond00)) and ([Wittgenstein](#Wittgenstein19)) himself.


## Contents

The book states seven "propositions" (with sub-propositions):

1. The world is everything that is the case.

1. What is the case (a fact) is the existence of states of affairs.

1. A logical picture of facts is a thought.

1. A thought is a proposition with a sense.

   {#4.11} 4.11 The totality of true propositions is the whole of natural science (or the whole corpus of the natural sciences).

1. A proposition is a truth-function of elementary propositions. (An elementary proposition is a truth-function of itself.)

1. The general form of a proposition is the general form of a truth function, ...

1. Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.

## Formal Logic

The meaning of Wittgenstein's formal system remains disputed to this day, e.g. ([Wehmeier11](#Wehmeier11)).

## References

An expandable/collapsable online version (Pears/McGuinness English translation) is at

* [tractatuslogico-philosophicus.com](http://www.tractatuslogico-philosophicus.com/)

A side-by-side version of the German original and the Ogden/Ramsey and Pears/McGuinness English translations is at

* [Ludwig Wittgenstein: Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus Side-by-Side-by-Side Edition](http://people.umass.edu/klement/tlp/)

* {#Diamond00}Cora Diamond, _Ethics, imagination and the method of Wittgenstein's Tractatus_

{#Wittgenstein19}Wittgenstein schrieb in einem Brief an Ludwig von Ficker
> Ich wollte nämlich schreiben, mein Werk bestehe aus zwei Teilen:
aus dem, der hier vorliegt, und aus alle dem, was ich nicht geschrieben habe.
Und gerade dieser zweite Teil ist der Wichtige. Es wird nämlich das Ethische durch mein Buch gleichsam von Innen her begrenzt; und ich bin überzeugt, dass es, streng, NUR so zu begrenzen ist.

* {#Wehmeier11}Wehmeier, Vortrag _The First-Order Logic of the Tractatus_, [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e75U1fgBC6g)

category: reference