pages/1129.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Definition

There is a very general notion of _injective objects_ in a [[category]] $C$, and then there is a sequence of more concrete notions as $C$ is equipped with more [[stuff, structure, property|structure and property]], in particular for $C$ an [[abelian category]] [[additive and abelian categories|or a relative]] thereof.

The concept of [[resolutions]] by injective objects -- [[injective resolutions]] -- is crucial notably in the discussion of [[derived functors]] (in the context of [[abelian categories]]: [[derived functors in homological algebra]]).

### General definition 

Let $C$ be a [[category]] and $J \subset Mor(C)$ a [[class]] of [[morphisms]] in $C$.  

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

Frequently $J$ is the class of all [[monomorphisms]] or a related class.  

This is notably the case for  $C$ is a [[category of chain complexes]] equipped with the injective [[model structure on chain complexes]] and $J$ is its class of [[cofibrations]].

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #InjectiveObjects}
###### Definition

An object $I$ in $C$ is **$J$-injective** if all diagrams of the form

$$
  \array{
    X &\to& I
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{j \in J}}\downarrow 
    \\
    Z
  }
$$

admit an extension

$$
  \array{
    X &\to& I
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{j \in J}}\downarrow & \nearrow_{\mathrlap{\exists}}
    \\
    Z
  }
  \,.
$$

If $J$ is the class of all [[monomorphism]]s, we speak merely of an **injective object**.  

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #EnoughInjectives}
###### Definition

Ones says that a category $C$ has **enough injectives** if every object admits a [[monomorphism]] into an injective object.


=---



The dual notion is a [[projective object]]. 

Assuming the axiom of choice, we have the following easy result. 

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition 
An arbitrary small product of injective objects is injective. 

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark


If $C$ has a [[terminal object]] $*$ then these extensions are equivalently 
lifts

$$
  \array{
    X &\to& I
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{j \in J}}\downarrow & \nearrow_{\mathrlap{\exists}}
    &
    \downarrow
    \\
    Z
    &\to&
    *
  }
$$

and hence the $J$-injective objects are precisely those that have the [[right lifting property]] against the class $J$.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

If $C$ is a [[locally small category]] then $I$ is $J$-injective precisely if the [[hom-functor]]

$$
  Hom_C(-,I) : C^{op} \to Set
$$

takes morphisms in $J$ to [[epimorphism]]s in [[Set]].

=--



### In abelian categories 

The term _injective object_ is used most frequently in the context that $C$ is an [[abelian category]].  

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark


For $C$ an [[abelian category]] the class $J$ of monomorphisms is the same as the class of morphisms $f : A \to B$ such that $0 \to A \stackrel{f}{\to} B$ is [[exact sequence|exact]].  

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By definition of [[abelian category]] every monomorphism $A \hookrightarrow B$ is a [[kernel]], hence a [[pullback]] of the form

$$
  \array{
    A &\to& 0
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    B &\to& C
  }
$$

for $0$ the (algebraic) [[zero object]]. By the <a href="http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/pullback#Pasting">pasting law</a> for pullbacks we find that also the left square in 

$$
  \array{
    0 &\to& A &\to& 0
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    0 &\to& B &\to& C
  }
$$

is a pullback, hence $0 \to A \to B$ is exact.

=--

+-- {: .num_cor #EquivalentCharacterizationOfInjectivesInAbelianCategories}
###### Corollary

An [[object]] $I$ of an abelian category $C$ is then **injective** if it satisfies the following equivalent conditions:

* the [[hom-functor]] $Hom_C(-, I) : C^{op} \to Set$ is [[exact functor|exact]];

* for all [[morphism]]s $f : X \to Y$ such that $0 \to X \to Y$ is [[exact sequence|exact]] and for all $k : X \to I$, there exists $h : Y \to I$ such that $ h\circ f = k$.

$$
  \array{
    0 &\to& X &\stackrel{f}{\to}& Y
    \\
    && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{k}} & \swarrow_{\mathrlap{\exists h}}
    \\
    &&
    I 
  }
  \,.
$$

=--

### In chain complexes

See [[homotopically injective object]] for a relevant generalization to categories of chain complexes, and its relationship to ordinary injectivity.


## Examples

### Injective modules
 {#InjectiveModules}

Let $R$ be a [[commutative ring]] and  $C = R Mod$ the category of $R$-[[modules]]. We discuss [[injective modules]] over $R$ (see there for more).

The following criterion says that for identifying [[injective modules]] it is sufficient to test the [[right lifting property]] which characterizes injective objects by def. \ref{InjectiveObjects}, only on those [[monomorphisms]] which include an [[ideal]] into the base ring $R$.

+-- {: .num_theorem #BaerTheorem}
###### Proposition 
**([[Baer's criterion]])**

If the [[axiom of choice]] holds, 
then a [[module]] $Q \in R Mod$ is an [[injective module]] precisely if for $I$ any left $R$-[[ideal]] regarded as an $R$-module, any [[homomorphism]] $g : I \to Q$ in $C$ can be extended to all of $R$ along the inclusion $I \hookrightarrow R$.

=-- 

This is due to ([Baer](#Baer)).

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Sketch of proof 

Let $i \colon M \hookrightarrow N$ be a [[monomorphism]] in $R Mod$, and let $f \colon M \to Q$ be a map. We must extend $f$ to a map $h \colon N \to Q$. Consider the [[poset]] whose elements are pairs $(M', f')$ where $M'$ is an intermediate [[submodule]] between $M$ and $N$ and $f' \colon M' \to Q$ is an extension of $f$, ordered by $(M', f') \leq (M'', f'')$ if $M''$ contains $M'$ and $f''$ extends $f'$. By an application of [[Zorn's lemma]], this poset has a [[maximal element]], say $(M', f')$. Suppose $M'$ is not all of $N$, and let $x \in N$ be an element not in $M'$; we show that $f'$ extends to a map $M'' = \langle x \rangle + M' \to Q$, a [[contradiction]]. 

The set $\{r \in R: r x \in M'\}$ is an ideal $I$ of $R$, and we have a module [[homomorphism]] $g \colon I \to Q$ defined by $g(r) = f'(r x)$. By [[hypothesis]], we may extend $g$ to a module map $k \colon R \to Q$. Writing a general element of $M''$ as $r x + y$ where $y \in M'$, it may be shown that 

$$f''(r x + y) = k(r) + f'(y)$$ 

is well-defined and extends $f'$, as desired. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_corollary #DirectSumInjectives}
###### Corollary
(Assume that the [[axiom of choice]] holds.) Let $R$ be a [[Noetherian ring]], and let $\{Q_j\}_{j \in J}$ be a collection of [[injective modules]] over $R$. Then the [[direct sum]] $Q = \bigoplus_{j \in J} Q_j$ is also injective. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof 

By Baer's criterion, theorem \ref{BaerTheorem}, it suffices to show that for any [[ideal]] $I$ of $R$, a module [[homomorphism]] $f \colon I \to Q$ extends to a map $R \to Q$. Since $R$ is Noetherian, $I$ is [[finitely generated module|finitely generated]] as an $R$-module, say by elements $x_1, \ldots, x_n$. Let $p_j \colon Q \to Q_j$ be the [[projection]], and put $f_j = p_j \circ f$. Then for each $x_i$, $f_j(x_i)$ is nonzero for only finitely many summands. Taking all of these summands together over all $i$, we see that $f$ factors through 

$$\prod_{j \in J'} Q_j = \bigoplus_{j \in J'} Q_j \hookrightarrow Q$$ 

for some finite $J' \subset J$. But a [[product]] of injectives is injective, hence $f$ extends to a map $R \to \prod_{j \in J'} Q_j$, which completes the proof. 

=-- 

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Conversely, $R$ is a [[Noetherian ring]] if [[direct sums]] of injective $R$-[[modules]] are injective. 

=--

This is due to Bass and Papp. See ([Lam, Theorem 3.46](#Lam)).

### Injective abelian groups

Let $C = \mathbb{Z} Mod \simeq $ [[Ab]]  be the [[abelian category]] of [[abelian groups]]. 

+-- {: .num_prop #InjectiveAbelianGroupIsDivisibleGroup}
###### Proposition

If the [[axiom of choice]] holds, 
then an [[abelian group]] $A$ is an injective object in [[Ab]] precisely if it is a [[divisible group]], in that for all [[integers]] $n \in \mathbb{N}$ we have $n G = G$.

=--

This follows for instance using [[Baer's criterion]], prop. \ref{BaerTheorem}.

An explicit proof is spelled out at 
[Planet math -- abelian group is divisible if and only if it is an injective object](http://planetmath.org/AbelianGroupIsDivisibleIfAndOnlyIfItIsAnInjectiveObject.html)


+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

By prop. \ref{InjectiveAbelianGroupIsDivisibleGroup} the following [[abelian groups]] are injective in [[Ab]].

The group of [[rational numbers]] $\mathbb{Q}$ is injective in [[Ab]], as is the additive group of [[real numbers]] $\mathbb{R}$ and generally that underlying any [[field]] of characteristic zero. The additive group underlying any [[vector space]] is injective. The [[quotient]] of any injective group by any other group is injective.

=--

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

**Not** injective in [[Ab]] is for instance the [[cyclic group]] $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ for $n \gt 1$.

=--

## Properties

### Preservation of injective objects

+-- {: .num_lemma #RightAdjointsOfExactFunctorsPreserveInjectives}
###### Lemma

Given a pair of [[additive functor|additive]] [[adjoint functors]]

$$
  (L \dashv R)
  \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{B}
    \stackrel{\overset{L}{\longleftarrow}}{\underset{R}{\longrightarrow}}
  \mathcal{A}
$$

between [[abelian categories]] such that the [[left adjoint]] $L$ is an [[exact functor]], then the [[right adjoint]] preserves injective objects.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Observe that an object is injective precisely if the [[hom-functor]] into it sends [[monomorphisms]] to [[epimorphisms]], and that $L$ preserves monomorphisms by assumption of exactness. With this the statement follows via adjunction isomorphism

$$
  Hom_{\mathcal{A}}(-,R(I))\simeq Hom_{\mathcal{B}}(L(-),I)
  \,.
$$

=--

### Existence of enough injectives
 {#ExistenceOfEnoughInjectives}

We discuss a list of classes of categories that have _enough injective_
according to def. \ref{EnoughInjectives}.

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Every [[topos]] has enough injectives.  

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Every [[power object]] can be shown to be injective, and every object embeds into its power object by the "singletons" map.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #AbHasEnoughInjectives}
###### Proposition

Assuming some form of the [[axiom of choice]], the category of [[abelian groups]] has enough injectives.  

=--

Full AC is much more than required, however; [[small violations of choice]] suffices.

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 

By prop. \ref{InjectiveAbelianGroupIsDivisibleGroup} an [[abelian group]]
is an injective $\mathbb{Z}$-module precisely if it is a [[divisible group]]. So we need to show that every [[abelian group]] is a [[subgroup]] of a [[divisible group]].

To start with, notice that the group $\mathbb{Q}$ of [[rational numbers]] is divisible and hence the canonical embedding $\mathbb{Z} \hookrightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ shows that the additive group of [[integers]] embeds into an injective $\mathbb{Z}$-module.

Now by the discussion at _[[projective module]]_ every [[abelian group]] $A$ receives an [[epimorphism]] $(\oplus_{s \in S} \mathbb{Z}) \to A$ from a [[free group|free]] abelian group, hence is the [[quotient group]] of a [[direct sum]] of copies of $\mathbb{Z}$. Accordingly it embeds into a quotient $\tilde A$ of a direct sum of copies of $\mathbb{Q}$.

$$
  \array{
    ker &\stackrel{=}{\to}& ker 
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    (\oplus_{s \in S} \mathbb{Z}) &\hookrightarrow& (\oplus_{s \in S} \mathbb{Q})
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    A &\hookrightarrow& \tilde A
  }
$$

Here $\tilde A$ is divisible because the [[direct sum]] of divisible groups is again divisible, and also the [[quotient group]] of a divisible groups is again divisble. So this exhibits an embedding of any $A$ into a divisible abelian group, hence into an injective $\mathbb{Z}$-module.


=--


+-- {: .num_lemma #TransferOfEnoughInjectivesAlongAdjunctions}
###### Lemma

Given a pair of [[additive functor|additive]] [[adjoint functors]]

$$
  (L \dashv R)
  \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{B}
    \stackrel{\overset{L}{\longleftarrow}}{\underset{R}{\longrightarrow}}
  \mathcal{A}
$$

between [[abelian categories]] such that the [[left adjoint]] $L$ is 

1. an [[exact functor]],

1. a [[faithful functor]]. 

Then if $\mathcal{B}$ has enough injectives, also $\mathcal{A}$ has enough injectives.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Consider $A \in \mathcal{A}$. By the assumption that $\mathcal{B}$ has enough injectives, there is an injective object $I \in \mathcal{B}$ and a monomorphism $i \colon L(A) \hookrightarrow I$. The [[adjunct]] of this is a morphism

$$
  \tilde i \colon A \longrightarrow R(I)
$$

and so it is sufficient to show that

1. $R(I)$ is injective in $\mathcal{A}$;

1. $\tilde i$ is a monomorphism.

The first point is the statement of lemma \ref{RightAdjointsOfExactFunctorsPreserveInjectives}.

For the second point, consider the [[kernel]] of $\tilde i$ as part of the [[exact sequence]]

$$
  ker(\tilde i)\longrightarrow A \stackrel{\tilde i}{\longrightarrow} R(I)
  \,.
$$

By the assumption that $L$ is an [[exact functor]], the image of this sequence under $L$ is still exact

$$
  L(ker(\tilde i)) \longrightarrow L(A) \stackrel{L(\tilde i)}{\longrightarrow} L(R(I))
  \,.
$$

Now observe that $L(\tilde i)$ is a monomorphism: this is because its composite $L(A) \stackrel{L(\tilde i)}{\longrightarrow} L(R(I)) \stackrel{\epsilon}{\longrightarrow} I$ with the [[adjunction unit]] is (by the formula for [[adjuncts]]) the original morphism $i$, which by construction is a monomorphism. Therefore the exactness of the above sequence means that $L(ker(\tilde i)) \to L(A)$ is the [[zero morphism]]; and by the assumption that $L$ is a [[faithful functor]] this means that already $ker(\tilde i) \to A$ is zero, hence that $ker(\tilde i) = 0$, hence that $\tilde i$ is a monomorphism.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #RModHasEnoughInjectives}
###### Proposition

As soon as the category [[Ab]] of [[abelian groups]] has enough injectives, so does the [[abelian category]] $R$[[Mod]] of [[modules]] over some [[ring]] $R$.  

In particular if the [[axiom of choice]] holds, then $R Mod$ has enough injectives.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Observe that the [[forgetful functor]] $U\colon R Mod \to AbGp$ has both a [[left adjoint]] $R_!$ ([[extension of scalars]] from $\mathbb{Z}$ to $R$) and a right adjoint $R_*$ ([[coextension of scalars]]).  Since it has a left adjoint, it is [[exact functor|exact]]. Thus the statement follows via lemma \ref{TransferOfEnoughInjectivesAlongAdjunctions} from prop. \ref{AbHasEnoughInjectives}.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

For $R = k$ a [[field]], hence $R$[[Mod]] = $k$[[Vect]], every object is both injective as well as [[projective object|projective]].

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #AbelianSheavesHaveEnoughProjectives}
###### Proposition

The category of [[abelian sheaves]] $Ab(Sh(C))$ on any [[small site]] $C$, hence the category of abelian groups in the [[sheaf topos]] over $C$, has enough injectives.

=--

A proof of can be found in [[Peter Johnstone]]'s book *Topos Theory*, p261.

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

This is in stark contrast to the situation for [[projective objects]], which generally do not exist in categories of sheaves.  

=--

+-- {: .num_cor}
###### Corollary

The category of sheaves of modules over any [[sheaf of rings]] on any [[small site]] also enough injectives.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Combining prop. \ref{AbelianSheavesHaveEnoughProjectives} with prop. \ref{AbHasEnoughInjectives} (which relativizes to any topos).  

=--

This slick proof of this important fact was pointed out by [[Colin McLarty]] in an email to the categories list dated 10 Oct 2010.


### Injective resolutions
 {#InjectiveResolutions}

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Let $\mathcal{A}$ be an [[abelian category]]. Then for every object
$X \in \mathcal{A}$ there is an [[injective resolution]], hence
a [[chain complex]]

$$
  J^\bullet = [J^0 \to \cdots \to J^n \to \cdots] \in Ch_(\mathcal{A})
$$ 

equipped with a a [[quasi-isomorphism]] of [[cochain complexes]]  $X \stackrel{\sim}{\to} J^\bullet$

$$
  \array{
    X &\to& 0 &\to& \cdots &\to& 0 &\to& \cdots
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow && && \downarrow
    \\
    J^0 &\to& J^1 &\to& \codt &\to& J^n &\to& \cdots
  }
  \,.
$$

=--


## Related concepts

* [[projective object]], [[projective presentation]], [[projective cover]], [[projective resolution]]

  * [[projective module]]

* **injective object**, [[injective presentation]], [[injective envelope]], [[injective resolution]]

  * [[injective module]]

* [[free object]], [[free resolution]]
 
  * [[free module]]

* flat object, [[flat resolution]]

  * [[flat module]]


## References

The notion of [[injective modules]] was introduced in 

* R. Baer (1940)
 {#Baer}

(The dual notion of [[projective modules]] was considered explicitly only much later.)

A general discussion can be found in 

* [[Masaki Kashiwara]], [[Pierre Schapira]], _[[Categories and Sheaves]]_

The general notion of injective objects is in section 9.5, the case of injective complexes in section 14.1.

Using tools from the theory of [[accessible categories]], injective objects are discussed in

* [[Jiri Rosicky]], _Injectivity and accessible categories_ ([ps](http://www.math.muni.cz/~rosicky/papers/acc5.ps))

[Baer's criterion](#Baer) is discussed in many texts, for example 

* N. Jacobsen, _Basic Algebra II_, W.H. Freeman and Company, 1980. 

See also 

* T.-Y. Lam, _Lectures on modules and rings_, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 189, Springer Verlag (1999). 
{#Lam}

[[!redirects injective objects]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 106688 Revision date: 2016-03-17 15:28:03 Page name: injective object Author: Todd Trimble IP address: 67.81.95.215

pages/1129.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Definition

There is a very general notion of _injective objects_ in a [[category]] $C$, and then there is a sequence of more concrete notions as $C$ is equipped with more [[stuff, structure, property|structure and property]], in particular for $C$ an [[abelian category]] [[additive and abelian categories|or a relative]] thereof.

The concept of [[resolutions]] by injective objects -- [[injective resolutions]] -- is crucial notably in the discussion of [[derived functors]] (in the context of [[abelian categories]]: [[derived functors in homological algebra]]).

### General definition 

Let $C$ be a [[category]] and $J \subset Mor(C)$ a [[class]] of [[morphisms]] in $C$.  

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

Frequently $J$ is the class of all [[monomorphisms]] or a related class.  

This is notably the case for  $C$ is a [[category of chain complexes]] equipped with the injective [[model structure on chain complexes]] and $J$ is its class of [[cofibrations]].

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #InjectiveObjects}
###### Definition

An object $I$ in $C$ is **$J$-injective** if all diagrams of the form

$$
  \array{
    X &\to& I
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{j \in J}}\downarrow 
    \\
    Z
  }
$$

admit an extension

$$
  \array{
    X &\to& I
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{j \in J}}\downarrow & \nearrow_{\mathrlap{\exists}}
    \\
    Z
  }
  \,.
$$

If $J$ is the class of all [[monomorphism]]s, we speak merely of an **injective object**.  

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #EnoughInjectives}
###### Definition

Ones says that a category $C$ has **enough injectives** if every object admits a [[monomorphism]] into an injective object.


=---



The dual notion is a [[projective object]]. 

Assuming the axiom of choice, we have the following easy result. 

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition 
An arbitrary small product of injective objects is injective. 

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark


If $C$ has a [[terminal object]] $*$ then these extensions are equivalently 
lifts

$$
  \array{
    X &\to& I
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{j \in J}}\downarrow & \nearrow_{\mathrlap{\exists}}
    &
    \downarrow
    \\
    Z
    &\to&
    *
  }
$$

and hence the $J$-injective objects are precisely those that have the [[right lifting property]] against the class $J$.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

If $C$ is a [[locally small category]] then $I$ is $J$-injective precisely if the [[hom-functor]]

$$
  Hom_C(-,I) : C^{op} \to Set
$$

takes morphisms in $J$ to [[epimorphism]]s in [[Set]].

=--



### In abelian categories 

The term _injective object_ is used most frequently in the context that $C$ is an [[abelian category]].  

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark


For $C$ an [[abelian category]] the class $J$ of monomorphisms is the same as the class of morphisms $f : A \to B$ such that $0 \to A \stackrel{f}{\to} B$ is [[exact sequence|exact]].  

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By definition of [[abelian category]] every monomorphism $A \hookrightarrow B$ is a [[kernel]], hence a [[pullback]] of the form

$$
  \array{
    A &\to& 0
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    B &\to& C
  }
$$

for $0$ the (algebraic) [[zero object]]. By the <a href="http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/pullback#Pasting">pasting law</a> for pullbacks we find that also the left square in 

$$
  \array{
    0 &\to& A &\to& 0
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    0 &\to& B &\to& C
  }
$$

is a pullback, hence $0 \to A \to B$ is exact.

=--

+-- {: .num_cor #EquivalentCharacterizationOfInjectivesInAbelianCategories}
###### Corollary

An [[object]] $I$ of an abelian category $C$ is then **injective** if it satisfies the following equivalent conditions:

* the [[hom-functor]] $Hom_C(-, I) : C^{op} \to Set$ is [[exact functor|exact]];

* for all [[morphism]]s $f : X \to Y$ such that $0 \to X \to Y$ is [[exact sequence|exact]] and for all $k : X \to I$, there exists $h : Y \to I$ such that $ h\circ f = k$.

$$
  \array{
    0 &\to& X &\stackrel{f}{\to}& Y
    \\
    && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{k}} & \swarrow_{\mathrlap{\exists h}}
    \\
    &&
    I 
  }
  \,.
$$

=--

### In chain complexes

See [[homotopically injective object]] for a relevant generalization to categories of chain complexes, and its relationship to ordinary injectivity.


## Examples

### Injective modules
 {#InjectiveModules}

Let $R$ be a [[commutative ring]] and  $C = R Mod$ the category of $R$-[[modules]]. We discuss [[injective modules]] over $R$ (see there for more).

The following criterion says that for identifying [[injective modules]] it is sufficient to test the [[right lifting property]] which characterizes injective objects by def. \ref{InjectiveObjects}, only on those [[monomorphisms]] which include an [[ideal]] into the base ring $R$.

+-- {: .num_theorem #BaerTheorem}
###### Proposition 
**([[Baer's criterion]])**

If the [[axiom of choice]] holds, 
then a [[module]] $Q \in R Mod$ is an [[injective module]] precisely if for $I$ any left $R$-[[ideal]] regarded as an $R$-module, any [[homomorphism]] $g : I \to Q$ in $C$ can be extended to all of $R$ along the inclusion $I \hookrightarrow R$.

=-- 

This is due to ([Baer](#Baer)).

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Sketch of proof 

Let $i \colon M \hookrightarrow N$ be a [[monomorphism]] in $R Mod$, and let $f \colon M \to Q$ be a map. We must extend $f$ to a map $h \colon N \to Q$. Consider the [[poset]] whose elements are pairs $(M', f')$ where $M'$ is an intermediate [[submodule]] between $M$ and $N$ and $f' \colon M' \to Q$ is an extension of $f$, ordered by $(M', f') \leq (M'', f'')$ if $M''$ contains $M'$ and $f''$ extends $f'$. By an application of [[Zorn's lemma]], this poset has a [[maximal element]], say $(M', f')$. Suppose $M'$ is not all of $N$, and let $x \in N$ be an element not in $M'$; we show that $f'$ extends to a map $M'' = \langle x \rangle + M' \to Q$, a [[contradiction]]. 

The set $\{r \in R: r x \in M'\}$ is an ideal $I$ of $R$, and we have a module [[homomorphism]] $g \colon I \to Q$ defined by $g(r) = f'(r x)$. By [[hypothesis]], we may extend $g$ to a module map $k \colon R \to Q$. Writing a general element of $M''$ as $r x + y$ where $y \in M'$, it may be shown that 

$$f''(r x + y) = k(r) + f'(y)$$ 

is well-defined and extends $f'$, as desired. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_corollary #DirectSumInjectives}
###### Corollary
(Assume that the [[axiom of choice]] holds.) Let $R$ be a [[Noetherian ring]], and let $\{Q_j\}_{j \in J}$ be a collection of [[injective modules]] over $R$. Then the [[direct sum]] $Q = \bigoplus_{j \in J} Q_j$ is also injective. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof 

By Baer's criterion, theorem \ref{BaerTheorem}, it suffices to show that for any [[ideal]] $I$ of $R$, a module [[homomorphism]] $f \colon I \to Q$ extends to a map $R \to Q$. Since $R$ is Noetherian, $I$ is [[finitely generated module|finitely generated]] as an $R$-module, say by elements $x_1, \ldots, x_n$. Let $p_j \colon Q \to Q_j$ be the [[projection]], and put $f_j = p_j \circ f$. Then for each $x_i$, $f_j(x_i)$ is nonzero for only finitely many summands. Taking all of these summands together over all $i$, we see that $f$ factors through 

$$\prod_{j \in J'} Q_j = \bigoplus_{j \in J'} Q_j \hookrightarrow Q$$ 

for some finite $J' \subset J$. But a [[product]] of injectives is injective, hence $f$ extends to a map $R \to \prod_{j \in J'} Q_j$, which completes the proof. 

=-- 

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Conversely, $R$ is a [[Noetherian ring]] if [[direct sums]] of injective $R$-[[modules]] are injective. 

=--

This is due to Bass and Papp. See ([Lam, Theorem 3.46](#Lam)).

### Injective abelian groups

Let $C = \mathbb{Z} Mod \simeq $ [[Ab]]  be the [[abelian category]] of [[abelian groups]]. 

+-- {: .num_prop #InjectiveAbelianGroupIsDivisibleGroup}
###### Proposition

If the [[axiom of choice]] holds, 
then an [[abelian group]] $A$ is an injective object in [[Ab]] precisely if it is a [[divisible group]], in that for all [[integers]] $n \in \mathbb{N}$ we have $n G = G$.

=--

This follows for instance using [[Baer's criterion]], prop. \ref{BaerTheorem}.

An explicit proof is spelled out at 
[Planet math -- abelian group is divisible if and only if it is an injective object](http://planetmath.org/AbelianGroupIsDivisibleIfAndOnlyIfItIsAnInjectiveObject.html)


+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

By prop. \ref{InjectiveAbelianGroupIsDivisibleGroup} the following [[abelian groups]] are injective in [[Ab]].

The group of [[rational numbers]] $\mathbb{Q}$ is injective in [[Ab]], as is the additive group of [[real numbers]] $\mathbb{R}$ and generally that underlying any [[field]] of characteristic zero. The additive group underlying any [[vector space]] is injective. The [[quotient]] of any injective group by any other group is injective.

=--

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

**Not** injective in [[Ab]] is for instance the [[cyclic group]] $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ for $n \gt 1$.

=--

### In toposes 

In any [[topos]], the [[subobject classifier]] $\Omega$ is an injective object, as is any power of $\Omega$ ([[Mac Lane-Moerdijk]], IV.10). 

### In topological spaces 

In the category [[Top]] of all topological spaces, the injective objects are precisely the [[inhabited set|inhabited]] [[indiscrete spaces]]. 

In the category of $T_0$ spaces (see [[separation axiom]]), the injective objects are precisely those given by Scott topologies on [[continuous lattices]], which as [[locales]] are [[local compactum|locally compact]] and [[spatial locale|spatial]]. 

## Properties

### Preservation of injective objects

+-- {: .num_lemma #RightAdjointsOfExactFunctorsPreserveInjectives}
###### Lemma

Given a pair of [[additive functor|additive]] [[adjoint functors]]

$$
  (L \dashv R)
  \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{B}
    \stackrel{\overset{L}{\longleftarrow}}{\underset{R}{\longrightarrow}}
  \mathcal{A}
$$

between [[abelian categories]] such that the [[left adjoint]] $L$ is an [[exact functor]], then the [[right adjoint]] preserves injective objects.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Observe that an object is injective precisely if the [[hom-functor]] into it sends [[monomorphisms]] to [[epimorphisms]], and that $L$ preserves monomorphisms by assumption of exactness. With this the statement follows via adjunction isomorphism

$$
  Hom_{\mathcal{A}}(-,R(I))\simeq Hom_{\mathcal{B}}(L(-),I)
  \,.
$$

=--

### Existence of enough injectives
 {#ExistenceOfEnoughInjectives}

We discuss a list of classes of categories that have _enough injective_
according to def. \ref{EnoughInjectives}.

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Every [[topos]] has enough injectives.  

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Every [[power object]] can be shown to be injective, and every object embeds into its power object by the "singletons" map.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #AbHasEnoughInjectives}
###### Proposition

Assuming some form of the [[axiom of choice]], the category of [[abelian groups]] has enough injectives.  

=--

Full AC is much more than required, however; [[small violations of choice]] suffices.

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 

By prop. \ref{InjectiveAbelianGroupIsDivisibleGroup} an [[abelian group]]
is an injective $\mathbb{Z}$-module precisely if it is a [[divisible group]]. So we need to show that every [[abelian group]] is a [[subgroup]] of a [[divisible group]].

To start with, notice that the group $\mathbb{Q}$ of [[rational numbers]] is divisible and hence the canonical embedding $\mathbb{Z} \hookrightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ shows that the additive group of [[integers]] embeds into an injective $\mathbb{Z}$-module.

Now by the discussion at _[[projective module]]_ every [[abelian group]] $A$ receives an [[epimorphism]] $(\oplus_{s \in S} \mathbb{Z}) \to A$ from a [[free group|free]] abelian group, hence is the [[quotient group]] of a [[direct sum]] of copies of $\mathbb{Z}$. Accordingly it embeds into a quotient $\tilde A$ of a direct sum of copies of $\mathbb{Q}$.

$$
  \array{
    ker &\stackrel{=}{\to}& ker 
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    (\oplus_{s \in S} \mathbb{Z}) &\hookrightarrow& (\oplus_{s \in S} \mathbb{Q})
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    A &\hookrightarrow& \tilde A
  }
$$

Here $\tilde A$ is divisible because the [[direct sum]] of divisible groups is again divisible, and also the [[quotient group]] of a divisible groups is again divisble. So this exhibits an embedding of any $A$ into a divisible abelian group, hence into an injective $\mathbb{Z}$-module.


=--


+-- {: .num_lemma #TransferOfEnoughInjectivesAlongAdjunctions}
###### Lemma

Given a pair of [[additive functor|additive]] [[adjoint functors]]

$$
  (L \dashv R)
  \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{B}
    \stackrel{\overset{L}{\longleftarrow}}{\underset{R}{\longrightarrow}}
  \mathcal{A}
$$

between [[abelian categories]] such that the [[left adjoint]] $L$ is 

1. an [[exact functor]],

1. a [[faithful functor]]. 

Then if $\mathcal{B}$ has enough injectives, also $\mathcal{A}$ has enough injectives.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Consider $A \in \mathcal{A}$. By the assumption that $\mathcal{B}$ has enough injectives, there is an injective object $I \in \mathcal{B}$ and a monomorphism $i \colon L(A) \hookrightarrow I$. The [[adjunct]] of this is a morphism

$$
  \tilde i \colon A \longrightarrow R(I)
$$

and so it is sufficient to show that

1. $R(I)$ is injective in $\mathcal{A}$;

1. $\tilde i$ is a monomorphism.

The first point is the statement of lemma \ref{RightAdjointsOfExactFunctorsPreserveInjectives}.

For the second point, consider the [[kernel]] of $\tilde i$ as part of the [[exact sequence]]

$$
  ker(\tilde i)\longrightarrow A \stackrel{\tilde i}{\longrightarrow} R(I)
  \,.
$$

By the assumption that $L$ is an [[exact functor]], the image of this sequence under $L$ is still exact

$$
  L(ker(\tilde i)) \longrightarrow L(A) \stackrel{L(\tilde i)}{\longrightarrow} L(R(I))
  \,.
$$

Now observe that $L(\tilde i)$ is a monomorphism: this is because its composite $L(A) \stackrel{L(\tilde i)}{\longrightarrow} L(R(I)) \stackrel{\epsilon}{\longrightarrow} I$ with the [[adjunction unit]] is (by the formula for [[adjuncts]]) the original morphism $i$, which by construction is a monomorphism. Therefore the exactness of the above sequence means that $L(ker(\tilde i)) \to L(A)$ is the [[zero morphism]]; and by the assumption that $L$ is a [[faithful functor]] this means that already $ker(\tilde i) \to A$ is zero, hence that $ker(\tilde i) = 0$, hence that $\tilde i$ is a monomorphism.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #RModHasEnoughInjectives}
###### Proposition

As soon as the category [[Ab]] of [[abelian groups]] has enough injectives, so does the [[abelian category]] $R$[[Mod]] of [[modules]] over some [[ring]] $R$.  

In particular if the [[axiom of choice]] holds, then $R Mod$ has enough injectives.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Observe that the [[forgetful functor]] $U\colon R Mod \to AbGp$ has both a [[left adjoint]] $R_!$ ([[extension of scalars]] from $\mathbb{Z}$ to $R$) and a right adjoint $R_*$ ([[coextension of scalars]]).  Since it has a left adjoint, it is [[exact functor|exact]]. Thus the statement follows via lemma \ref{TransferOfEnoughInjectivesAlongAdjunctions} from prop. \ref{AbHasEnoughInjectives}.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

For $R = k$ a [[field]], hence $R$[[Mod]] = $k$[[Vect]], every object is both injective as well as [[projective object|projective]].

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #AbelianSheavesHaveEnoughProjectives}
###### Proposition

The category of [[abelian sheaves]] $Ab(Sh(C))$ on any [[small site]] $C$, hence the category of abelian groups in the [[sheaf topos]] over $C$, has enough injectives.

=--

A proof of can be found in [[Peter Johnstone]]'s book *Topos Theory*, p261.

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

This is in stark contrast to the situation for [[projective objects]], which generally do not exist in categories of sheaves.  

=--

+-- {: .num_cor}
###### Corollary

The category of sheaves of modules over any [[sheaf of rings]] on any [[small site]] also enough injectives.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Combining prop. \ref{AbelianSheavesHaveEnoughProjectives} with prop. \ref{AbHasEnoughInjectives} (which relativizes to any topos).  

=--

This slick proof of this important fact was pointed out by [[Colin McLarty]] in an email to the categories list dated 10 Oct 2010.


### Injective resolutions
 {#InjectiveResolutions}

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Let $\mathcal{A}$ be an [[abelian category]]. Then for every object
$X \in \mathcal{A}$ there is an [[injective resolution]], hence
a [[chain complex]]

$$
  J^\bullet = [J^0 \to \cdots \to J^n \to \cdots] \in Ch_(\mathcal{A})
$$ 

equipped with a a [[quasi-isomorphism]] of [[cochain complexes]]  $X \stackrel{\sim}{\to} J^\bullet$

$$
  \array{
    X &\to& 0 &\to& \cdots &\to& 0 &\to& \cdots
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow && && \downarrow
    \\
    J^0 &\to& J^1 &\to& \codt &\to& J^n &\to& \cdots
  }
  \,.
$$

=--


## Related concepts

* [[projective object]], [[projective presentation]], [[projective cover]], [[projective resolution]]

  * [[projective module]]

* **injective object**, [[injective presentation]], [[injective envelope]], [[injective resolution]]

  * [[injective module]]

* [[free object]], [[free resolution]]
 
  * [[free module]]

* flat object, [[flat resolution]]

  * [[flat module]]


## References

The notion of [[injective modules]] was introduced in 

* R. Baer (1940)
 {#Baer}

(The dual notion of [[projective modules]] was considered explicitly only much later.)

A general discussion can be found in 

* [[Masaki Kashiwara]], [[Pierre Schapira]], _[[Categories and Sheaves]]_

The general notion of injective objects is in section 9.5, the case of injective complexes in section 14.1.

Using tools from the theory of [[accessible categories]], injective objects are discussed in

* [[Jiri Rosicky]], _Injectivity and accessible categories_ ([ps](http://www.math.muni.cz/~rosicky/papers/acc5.ps))

[Baer's criterion](#Baer) is discussed in many texts, for example 

* N. Jacobsen, _Basic Algebra II_, W.H. Freeman and Company, 1980. 

See also 

* T.-Y. Lam, _Lectures on modules and rings_, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 189, Springer Verlag (1999). 
{#Lam}

[[!redirects injective objects]]
