
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Supergeometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include supergeometry - contents]]
=--
#### Manifolds and cobordisms
+--{: .hide}
[[!include manifolds and cobordisms - contents]]
=--
=--
=--





#Contents#

* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea

A [[supermanifold]] is a [[space]] locally modeled on [[Cartesian space]]s and [[superpoint]]s.

There are different approaches to the definition and theory of supermanifolds in the literature. The definition 

* [As locally ringed spaces](#AsLocallyRingedSpace)

is popular. The definition 

* [As manifolds over superpoints](#OverSuperpoints)

has been argued to have advantages, see also the references at [[super ∞-groupoid]].

## As locally ringed spaces
 {#AsLocallyRingedSpace}

We discuss a description of supermanifolds that goes back to 
([BerezinLeites](BerezinLeites)).

### Definition

+-- {: .num_defn #SupermanifoldLocallyRingedSpace}
###### Definition

A **supermanifold** $X$ of dimension $p|q$ is a
[[ringed space]] $(|X|, O_X)$ where

* the [[topological space]] $|X|$ is [[second countable space]], [[Hausdorff space]],

* $O_X$ is a [[sheaf]] of commutative [[super algebra]]s that is locally on small enough open subsets $U \subset |X|$ isomorphic to one of the form $C^\infty(U) \otimes \wedge^\bullet \mathbb{R}^q$.

A [[morphism]] of supermanifolds is a morphism of [[ringed space]]s (...).

=--

Forgetting the graded part by projecting out the nilpotent ideal in $O_X$ yields the underlying ordinary smooth [[manifold]] $X_{red}$.

One just writes $C^\infty(X)$ for the [[super algebra]] $O_X(X)$ of global sections.

With the obvious morphisms of [[ringed space]] this forms the [[category]] [[SDiff]] of supermanifolds.

### Examples

**Example** For $E \to X$ a smooth finite-rank [[vector bundle]] the [[manifold]] $X$ equipped with the [[Grassmann algebra]] over $C^\infty(X)$ of the sections  of the dual bundle

$$
  O_X(U) := \Gamma (\wedge^\bullet(E^*))
$$

is a supermanifold. This is usually denoted by $\Pi E$.

**Example** In particular, let $\mathbb{R}^{p+q} \to \mathbb{R}^p$ be the trivial rank $q$ [[vector bundle]] on $\mathbb{R}^p$ then one writes

$$
  \mathbb{R}^{p|q} := \Pi (\mathbb{R}^{p+q} \to \mathbb{R}^p)
$$

for the corresponding supermanifold.


### Properties

+-- {: .num_theorem}
###### Theorem
**(Batchelor's theorem)**

Every supermanifold is [[isomorphism|isomorphic]] to one of the form $\Pi E$ where $E$ is an ordinary smooth [[vector bundle]].

=--

**Warning** Still, the category of supermanifolds is far from being [[equivalence|equivalent]] to that of [[vector bundle]]s because a morphism of vector bundles translates to a morphism of supermanifolds that is strictly homogeneous in degrees, while a general morphism of supermanifolds need not be of this form.

But we have the following useful characterization of morphisms of supermanifolds:

+-- {: .num_theorem}
###### Theorem

* There is a natural bijection

  $$
    SDiff(X,Y) \simeq SAlgebras(C^\infty(Y), C^\infty(Y)),
  $$

  so the contravariant embedding of supermanifolds into superalgebra is a [[full and faithful functor]].

* Composition with the standard coordinate functions on $\mathbb{R}^{p|q}$ yields an [[isomorphism]]

  $$
    SDiff(X, \mathbb{R}^{p|q})
    \simeq
    (C^\infty(X)^{ev} \times \cdots p times \cdots 
    \times C^\infty(X)^{ev})
    \times
    (C^\infty(X)^{odd} \times \cdots q times \cdots 
    \times C^\infty(X)^{odd}).
  $$


=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The first statement is a direct extension of the classical fact that the contravariant embedding of ordinary [[smooth manifold]]s into algebras $X \mapsto C^\infty(X)$ is a [[full and faithful functor]].

=--

## As manifolds modeled on Grassman algebras
 {#ModeledOnGrassmannAlgebra}

We discuss a desription of supermanifolds that goes back to 
([deWitt](#deWitt)) and ([Rogers](#Rogers)).

(...)

## As manifolds over the base topos on superpoints
 {#OverSuperpoints}

Let $SuperPoint$ be the [[category]] of [[superpoint]]s. And $Sh(SuperPoint) = PSh(SuperPoint)$ its [[presheaf topos]].

We discuss a definition of supermanifolds that characterizes them, roughly,  as manifolds over this [[base topos]]. See ([Sachse](#Sachse)) and the references at [[super ∞-groupoid]].


### Definition

+-- {: .num_defn }
###### Definition

Let 

$$
  SuperSet := Sh(SuperPoint)
$$

be the [[sheaf topos]] over [[superpoint]]s. Let

$$
  \mathbb{K} \in SuperSet
$$

be the canomnical commutative ring object, as discussed at [[superalgebra]].

=--

+-- {: .num_defn }
###### Definition

A **superdomain** is an open subfunctor (...) of a [[locally convex vector space|locally convex]] $\mathbb{K}$-module.

=--

This appears as ([Sachse, def. 4.6](#Sachse)). 

We now want to describe supermanifolds as [[manifold]]s in $SuperSet$ modeled on superdomains.

Write [[SmoothMfd]] for the [[category]] of ordinary [[smooth manifold]]s.

+-- {: .num_defn #SupermanifoldOverSuperpoint}
###### Definition

A _supermanifold_ is a functor $X : SuperPoint^{op} \to SmoothMfd$ equipped with an equivalence class of [supersmooth atlases](#).

A [[morphism]] of supermanifolds is a [[natural transformation]] $f : X \to X'$, such that for each pair of [[chart]]s $u : U \to X$ and $u' : U' \to X'$ the [[pullback]]

$$
  \array{
    U \times_{X'} U' &&\stackrel{p'}{\to}&& U'
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{p_1}}\downarrow & & && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{u'}}
    \\
    U &\stackrel{u}{\to}& X &\stackrel{f}{\to}& X'
  }
$$

can be equipped with the structture of a [Banach superdomain](#) such that $p_1$ and $p_2$ are supersmooth (...)

=--

This appears as ([Sachse, def. 4.13, 4.14](#Sachse)).

### Properties

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The categories of supermanifolds defined as locally ringed spaces, 
def. \ref{SupermanifoldLocallyRingedSpace} and as manifolds over superpoints,
def. \ref{SupermanifoldOverSuperpoint} are 
[[equivalence of categories|equivalent]].

=--

This appears as ([Sachse, theorem 5.1](#Sachse)). See section 5.2 there for a discussion of the relation to the [deWitt-definition](#ModeledOnGrassmannAlgebra).


## Related concepts

* [[integration over supermanifolds]]

* [[super vector bundle]] 

* [[super Riemann surface]]

* [[superconnection]]

* [[superdifferential form]]

* [[NQ-supermanifold]]


## References

### General 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Notes On Supermanifolds and Integration_ ([arXiv:1209.2199](http://arxiv.org/abs/1209.2199))

### As locally ringed spaces

* F. A. Berezin, D. A. Leĭtes, _Supermanifolds_, (Russian) Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR __224__ (1975), no. 3, 505--508; English transl.: Soviet Math. Dokl. __16__ (1975), no. 5, 1218--1222 (1976).
 {#BerezinLeites}

* I. L. Buchbinder, S. M. Kuzenko, _Ideas and methods of supersymmetry and supergravity; or A walk through superspace_

A more general variant of this in the spirit of [[locally algebra-ed topos]]es is in

* Alexander Alldridge, _A convenient category of supermanifolds_ ([arXiv:1109.3161](http://arxiv.org/abs/1109.3161))

### As manifolds over superpoints
 {#ReferencesOverSuperpoints}

The proposal that the study of super-structures in mathematics should be regarded as taking place over the [[base topos]] on the [[site]] of [[super point]]s has been made around 1984 in

* [[Albert Schwarz]], _On the definition of superspace_ Teoret. Mat. Fiz., 1984,  Volume 60,  Number 1, Pages 37–42   (Mi tmf5111), ([russian original](http://www.mathnet.ru/links/b12306f831b8c37d32d5ba8511d60c93/tmf5111.pdf))

and in 

* V. Molotkov., _Infinite-dimensional $\mathbb{Z}_2^k$-supermanifolds_ , ICTP
preprints, IC/84/183, 1984.

and in

* [[Alexander Voronov]], _Maps of supermanifolds_ , Teoret. Mat.
Fiz., 60(1):43–48, 1984.

See also

* Anatoly Konechny and [[Albert Schwarz]], 

  _On $(k \oplus l|q)$-dimensional supermanifolds_ in _Supersymmetry and Quantum Field Theory_ (D. Volkov memorial volume) Springer-Verlag, 1998 ,
Lecture Notes in Physics, 509 , J. Wess and V. Akulov (editors)([arXiv:hep-th/9706003](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9706003))

  _Theory of $(k \oplus l|q)$-dimensional supermanifolds_ Sel. math., New ser. 6 (2000) 471 { 486

* [[Albert Schwarz]], I- Shapiro, _Supergeometry and Arithmetic Geometry_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0605119](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0605119))

A comprehensive discussion of the situation over the site of superpoints is given in 

* [[Christoph Sachse]], _A Categorical Formulation of Superalgebra and Supergeometry_ ([arXiv:0802.4067](http://arxiv.org/abs/0802.4067))
{#Sachse}

The site of formal duals not just to [[Grassmann algebra]]s but to all super-[[infinitesimally thickened point]]s is discussed in

* L. Balduzzi, C. Carmeli, R. Fioresi, _The local functors of points of Supermanifolds_ ([arXiv:0908.1872](http://arxiv.org/abs/0908.1872))

### As manifolds modeld on Grassmann algebras

* Bryce de Witt, _Supermanifolds_, Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics, 1984, 1992
{#deWitt}

* Alice Rogers
 {#Rogers}

### Other

* [[Yuri Manin]], _Topics in noncommutative geometry_, Princeton Univ. Press 1991. 

* P. Deligne, P. Etingof, D.S. Freed, L. Jeffrey, D. Kazhdan, J. Morgan, D.R. Morrison and E. Witten, eds.  _Quantum fields and strings, A course for mathematicians_, 2 vols. Amer. Math. Soc. Providence 1999. ([web version](http://www.math.ias.edu/qft))

* V. S. Varadarajan, _Supersymmetry for mathematicians: an introduction_, AMS and Courant Institute, 2004.

* [[Alberto S. Cattaneo]], Florian Schaetz, _Introduction to supergeometry_, [arxiv/1011.3401](http://arxiv.org/abs/1011.3401)

There are many books in [[physics]] on [[supersymmetry]] (most well known is by Wess and Barger from 1992), but they emphasise more on the [[supersymmetry algebra]]s rather than on (the superspace and) _supermanifolds_. They should therefore rather be listed under entry [[supersymmetry]].  

[[!redirects super manifold]]

[[!redirects supermanifolds]]