
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Gravity
+--{: .hide}
[[!include gravity contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[physics|physical]] [[theory (physics)|theory]] of [[Einstein]]-[[gravity]] ("[[general relativity]]") predicts, via [[Einstein equations|Einstein's equations of motion]], that [[vacuum]] [[spacetime]] may show a kind of oscillations of the [[field]] of [[gravity]] roughly analogous to [[electromagnetic waves]] in [[electromagnetism]]. (Both kinds of waves are oscillation of the [[field (physics)|field]] itself and do not depend on some "medium" such as a water wave does.) In fact, since the [[force]] of [[gravity]] is reflected in the [[pseudo-Riemannian geometry]] of [[spacetime]], as gravitational wave is a kind of periodic distortion of spacetime geometry itself.

There has accumulated excellent indirect evidence for them from the observation of [[binary pulsars]]. Their observed rotational motion loses energy precisely to the extent that [[general relativity]] predicts is being radiated away by gravitational waves.

On 11 Febrary 2016 was the announcement of the first direct detection by the [[LIGO]] collaboration, using laser interferometry, of a gravitational wave signal coming from the in-spiral and merge of a pair of [[black holes]] ([LIGO 2016](#LIGO16)). The signal was a chirp at 35-250 Hz (converted to audio in [this looped recording](https://youtu.be/TWqhUANNFXw)), detected as coming from the sky over the southern hemisphere on 14 September 2015.


## References

The original article is

* {#Einstein16} [[Albert Einstein]], _Näherungsweise Integration der Feldgleichungen der Gravitation_, Sitzung der physikalisch-mathematischen Klasse vom 22. Juni 1916 ([web](http://echo.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/ECHOdocuView?url=/permanent/echo/einstein/sitzungsberichte/BGG54UCY/index.meta&ww=0.7142&wh=0.7142&wx=0.2315))

A walk through the derivation of gravitational waves from linearization of [[Einstein's equations]] may be found for instance on pages 5-24 of

* {#Guidry13} Mike Guidry, _[Astrophysics 616: General Relativity, Black Holes, and Cosmology](http://eagle.phys.utk.edu/guidry/astro616/)_ -- _Chapter 21 -- Gravitational waves_ ([pdf](http://eagle.phys.utk.edu/guidry/astro616/lectures/lecture_ch21.pdf))

Indirect detection of gravitational wave based on energy loss of a binary star pulsar system is due to 

* {#HulseTaylor75} Hulse, Taylor, _Discovery of a pulsar in a binary system_, The astrophysical journal, 195:L51-53, 1975 ([web](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/full/1975ApJ...195L..51H))

Direct detection of gravitational waves by the [[LIGO]] experiment is reported in 

* {#LIGO16} B. P. Abbott et al. ([[LIGO]] Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration), _Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger_, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 061102, 11 February 2016, doi:[10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102](http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102)


See also

* Wikipedia, _[Gravitational wave](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravitational_wave)_


[[!redirects gravitational waves]]

[[!redirects gravitational wave spacetime]]


