
> under construction

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

When formulating a [[theory of physics]] in terms of [[mathematics]] one typically models the range of certain physical quantities by [[torsors]] over some [[group]] of transformations.  

For instance a [[wavelength]] would be identified as element in the [[real line]] minus its origin, $\mathbb{R}-\{0\}$ , being a torsor over the [[multiplicative group]] $\mathbb{R}^\times$ of [[real numbers]]. 

In order for the "[[coordination]]" of the mathematical theory with physical [[experiment]] to take place, one needs to choose an identification of this abstract torsor with the (idealized) one that it is supposed to model in nature. Such a choice is equivalent to a choice of [[unit]] (in the mathematical sense), hence a choice of element of the torsor. In this context this is then a _physical unit_. 

For instance picking an element in $\mathbb{R}-\{0\}$ and declaring this to be 1,650,763.73 wavelengths of the orange-red emission line in the electromagnetic spectrum of the krypton-86 atom in a vacuum means defining a _physical unit of length_ (in this example:  of the [[meter]]).

Physical units are often called _physical constants_. But by definition physical units are arbitrary choices made in the desciption of a physical system. Of course once made, one wants to keep these choices constant, such as to be useful. 

The actual _constants of nature_ are instead quotients of physical units. For instance the [[fine structure constant]] is the [[quotient]]

$$
  \alpha \coloneqq \frac{e^2}{ (4 \pi \epsilon_0) \hbar c} \in \mathbb{R}
$$

where $e$ is the [[electric charge]] of the [[electron]] expressed in physical units of charge (such as [[coulomb]]s), $\hbar$ is [[Planck's constant]] etc. The resulting quotient is then independent of any choices and is hence a [[real number]] characterizing nature independently of any conventions about how to parameterize it.

Notice that _choice of unit_ is also called _choice of gauge_. This is indeed the same "[[gauge]]" as in "[[gauge theory]]", as it is how ([Weyl 23](gauge#Weyl23)) introduced the concept of gauge theory: as a theory in which the choice of unit of length may change along paths in space.

## Unit of length in Lagrangian field theory

> under construction

Let $\Sigma \simeq \mathbb{R}^{p,1}$ be [[Minkowski spacetime]] and 
let $E \overset{fb}{\to} \Sigma$ be a [[fiber bundle]] thought of as a [[field]] bundle. The total space of the corresponding [[jet bundle]] $J^\infty_\Sigma(E) \overset{jb^\infty}{\to} \Sigma$ carries an [[action]] 

$$
  sc \;\colon\; \mathbb{R}^\times \times J^\infty_\Sigma(E) \longrightarrow J^\infty_\Sigma(E)
$$

of the multiplicative [[group of units]} $\mathbb{R}^\times$ of the [[real numbers]], given on the canonical [[coordinate functions]] by

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    x^\mu & \mapsto r x^\mu
    \\
    \phi^a & \mapsto \phi^a
    \\
    \phi^a_{\mu_1, \cdots \mu_k} & \mapsto r^{-k} \phi^a_{\mu_1 \cdots \mu_k}
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Let then 

$$
  \mathbf{L}_{(-)}
   \;\colon\;
  \mathbb{R}^n \longrightarrow [J^\infty_\Sigma(E), \mathbf{\Omega}^{p+1}]
$$

be a smoothly $n$-parameterized collection of Lagrangian densities, equipped with an $R^\times$-action 

$$
  scp \;\colon\; \mathbb{R}^\times \times \mathbb{R}^n \longrightarrow \mathbb{R}^n
$$

on $\mathbb{R}^n$ such that the combined scaling action is homogeneous on $\mathbf{L}$ in that there eists $dim \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that  for every $r \in \mathbb{R}^\times$ we have

$$
  sc_r^\ast \mathbf{L}_{( scp(-))} = r^{dim} \mathbf{L}_{(-)}
  \,.
$$


Then a parameter $a \colon \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$ such that there exists $w \in \mathbb{Z}$ with 

$$
  scp_r^\ast a = r^{w} a
$$

is said to have _dimension_ $[length]^{w}$.

For example the 



(...)



## Examples

* [[speed of light]]

* [[Planck's constant]]

* [[Compton wavelength]]

* [[Planck mass]]

## References

Discussion in the context of [[philosophy of science]] includes

* [[Georg Hegel]], [Book I, third section, first chapter](Science+of+Logic#TheMeasureFirstChapter)  of _[[Science of Logic]]_


[[!redirects physical unit]]
[[!redirects physical units]]
