
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Elliptic cohomology
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include elliptic cohomology -- contents]]
=--
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The universal [[elliptic cohomology]] [[cohomology theory|cohomology]] called [[tmf]] may be realized (after [[local spectrum|localization]] at some primes) as the [[homotopy fixed points]] of an [[∞-action]] of the [[modular group]] modulo a [[congruence subgroup]] in direct analogy to how [[KO-theory]] arises as the $\mathbb{Z}_2$-homotopy fixed points of [[KU-theory]] ([Mahowald-Rezk 09](#MahowaldRezk09), [Lawson-Naumann 12](#LawsonNaumann12), [Hill-Lawson 13](#HillLawson13)).

The way this works is roughly indicated in the following table:

[[!include moduli stack of curves -- table]]

For [[K-theory]] this relation induces the $\mathbb{Z}_2$-[[equivariant cohomology]]-version of [[KU]] which is [[KR-theory]]. In direct analogy to this one may hence consider $SL_2(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z})$-equivariant versions of [[tmf]] (localized at some primes). This maybe deserves to be called _modular equivariant elliptic cohomology_. 

This hasn't been studied much yet (or not at all), but there is some motivation for this from [[string theory]] (see [below](#MotivationFromStringTheory)) and in this context a relevance of modular equivariant elliptic cohomology theory has been conjectured in ([Kriz-Sati 05](#KrizSati05)).


## Motivation from string theory
 {#MotivationFromStringTheory}

A relevant role of some modular equivariant elliptic cohomology theory in [[string theory]] has been conjectured in ([Kriz-Sati 05](#KrizSati05)):

First of all, $\mathbb{Z}_2$-equivariant [[topological K-theory]], hence [[KR-theory]], is what controls the [[D-brane charges]] in general [[orientifold]] [[vacua]] of [[type II superstring theory]] (hence also of [[type I superstring theory]], which is thereby a special case). 

Next, there are various hints ([Kriz-Sati 04a](#KrizSati04a), [Kriz-Sati 04b](#KrizSati04b) [Kriz-Sati 05](#KrizSati05), [Sati 05](#Sati05)) that lifting [[string theory]] to "[[M-theory]]" involves replacing K-theory by [[elliptic cohomology]]. Not the least of these is the [[String orientation of tmf]] ([Ando-Hopkins-Strickland 01](#AndoHopkinsStrickland01), [Ando-Hopkins-Rezk 10](#AndoHopkinsRezk10)), which shows that where the [[partition function]] of a [[superparticle]] (such as that at the end of the [[type II superstring]] ending on a [[D-brane]]) is give by the [[Todd genus]] in [[KU-theory]], so the partition function of the [[superstring]] itself (possibly itself being the boundary of the [[M2-brane]] ending on a [[O9 plane]] ([[heterotic string]]) or on an [[M5-brane]] (self-dual "M-string")) is given by the refined [[Witten genus]] in [[elliptic cohomology]]/[[tmf]] (thus yielding "O9-plane charge" and [[M5-brane charge]] in 
[[elliptic cohomology]] ([Sati 10](#Sati10))).

Finally, the [[M-theory]]-lift of [[type II string theory]] is (or is naturally identified as) _[[F-theory]]_, which describes the [[axio-dilaton]] of the type II string [[vacua]] including the [[modular group|modular]] [[S-duality]]/[[U-duality]] acting on this as an [[elliptic fibration]] over [[spacetime]] (whose [[monodromy]] "homology invariant" is hence an $SL_2(\mathbb{Z})$-[[local system]]). It is hence natural to suspect that the combined [[worldsheet]]/[[target space]] $\mathbb{Z}_2$-equivariance of [[orientifold]] [[type II superstring]] backgrounds which is captured by [[KR-theory]] lifts in [[F-theory]] to some combined worldsheet/target space [[modular group]]-action. This is excatly what would be captured by modular invariant $tmf$ as indicated above, and and it is what is conjectured in ([Kriz-Sati 05](#KrizSati05)).

## Related concepts

* related but different: [[equivariant elliptic cohomology]]
 
## References

* {#MahowaldRezk09} [[Mark Mahowald]] [[Charles Rezk]], _Topological modular forms of level 3_, Pure Appl. Math. Quar. 5 (2009) 853-872 ([pdf](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/~rezk/tmf3-paper-final.pdf))

* {#LawsonNaumann12} [[Tyler Lawson]], [[Niko Naumann]], _Strictly commutative realizations of diagrams over the Steenrod algebra and topological modular forms at the prime 2_, Int. Math.
Res. Not. (2013) ([arXiv:1203.1696](http://arxiv.org/abs/1203.1696))

* {#HillLawson13} [[Michael Hill]], [[Tyler Lawson]], _Topological modular forms with level structure_ ([arXiv:1312.7394](http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.7394))

* {#AndoHopkinsStrickland01} [[Matthew Ando]], [[Michael Hopkins]], [[Neil Strickland]], _Elliptic spectra, the Witten genus and the theorem of the cube_, Invent. Math. 146 (2001) 595–687 MR1869850

* {#AndoHopkinsRezk10} [[Matthew Ando]], [[Mike Hopkins]], [[Charles Rezk]], _Multiplicative orientations of KO-theory and the spectrum of topological modular forms_, 2010 ([pdf](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/~mando/papers/koandtmf.pdf))


* {#KrizSati04a} [[Igor Kriz]], [[Hisham Sati]], _M Theory, Type IIA Superstrings, and Elliptic Cohomology_, Adv.Theor.Math.Phys. 8 (2004) 345-395 ([arXiv:hep-th/0404013](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0404013))

* {#KrizSati04b} [[Igor Kriz]], [[Hisham Sati]], _Type IIB String Theory, S-Duality, and Generalized Cohomology_, Nucl.Phys. B715 (2005) 639-664 ([arXiv:hep-th/0410293](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0410293))

* {#KrizSati05} [[Igor Kriz]], [[Hisham Sati]], _Type II string theory and modularity_, 	JHEP 0508 (2005) 038 ([arXiv:hep-th/0501060](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0501060))

* {#Sati05} [[Hisham Sati]], _The Elliptic curves in gauge theory, string theory, and cohomology_, JHEP 0603 (2006) 096 ([arXiv:hep-th/0511087](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0511087))

* {#Sati10} [[Hisham Sati]], _[[Geometric and topological structures related to M-branes]]_ , part I, Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 81 (2010), 181-236 [arXiv:1001.5020](http://arxiv.org/abs/1001.5020),