
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

For $G$ a [[compact Lie group]] (or more generally a [[compact topological group]]) the concept of _$G$-spectrum_ (or _$G$-equivariant spectrum_) is the generalization of that of [[spectrum]] as one passes from [[stable homotopy theory]] to [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]], or more generally, as $G$ is allow to vary, of [[global equivariant stable homotopy theory]]. See there for more details.

Where the ordinary concept of [[spectrum]] is given in terms of [[looping and delooping]] of ordinary [[topological spaces]] by ordinary [[spheres]], a $G$-spectrum is instead given by looping and delooping of [[topological G-spaces]] with respect to [[representation spheres]] of $G$, namely [[one-point compactifications]] of linear $G$-[[representations]], for all representations appearing in a chosen "[[G-universe]]".

Such a [[G-universe]] is called _complete_ if it contains every [[irreducible representation]] of $G$, and the spectra modeled on such a complete $G$-universe are the _genuine $G$-spectra_.
Equivalently, genuine $G$-spectra are expressed as _[[Mackey functors]]_.

At the other extreme, if the [[G-universe]] contains only the trivial representations, then the resulting spectra are the _[[spectra with G-action]]_, also called _[[naive G-spectra]]_ for emphasis of the distinction to the previous case.

The genuine $G$-spectra are richer than _[[spectra with G-action]]_ and have better homotopy-theoretic properties. 

## Properties

### Via excisive functors

Characterization of $G$-spectra [via excisive functors]() on [[G-spaces]] is in ([Blumberg 05](#Blumberg05)).

### Relation to Mackey functors

see at _[[Mackey functor]]_

### Relation to spectra with $G$-action

(e.g. [Carlsson 92, p. 14](#Carlsson92), [GreenleesMay, p.16](#GreenleesMay))

## Related concepts

* [[RO(G)-grading]]

## Examples 

* [[equivariant sphere spectrum]]
 
## References

Surveys and introductions include

* {#Carlsson92} [[Gunnar Carlsson]], _A survey of equivariant stable homotopy theory_,Topology, Vol 31, No. 1, pp. 1-27, 1992 ([pdf](http://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/~aar/papers/carlsson1.pdf))

* {#GreenleesMay} [[John Greenlees]], [[Peter May]], section 2 of _Equivariant stable homotopy theory_, in I.M. James (ed.), _Handbook of Algebraic Topology_ , pp. 279-325. 1995. ([pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/PAPERS/Newthird.pdf))


For more references see at _[[equivariant stable homotopy theory]]_ and at _[[Mackey functor]]_

Characterization via [[excisive functors]] is in 

* {#Blumberg05} [[Andrew Blumberg]], _Continuous functors as a model for the equivariant stable homotopy category_ ([arXiv:math.AT/0505512](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.AT/0505512))


[[!redirects G-spectra]]

[[!redirects genuine G-spectrum]]
[[!redirects genuine G-spectra]]
[[!redirects G-equivariant spectrum]]
[[!redirects G-equivariant spectra]]
[[!redirects equivariant spectrum]]
[[!redirects equivariant spectra]]