

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

This page collects links related to the collection of lecture notes

* [[Michael Douglas]], [[Elias Kiritsis]] et. al. (eds.), 

  _String theory and the real world -- from particle physics to astrophysics_, 

  Les Houches  Session LXXXVII 2007


on [[string phenomenology]].

> For other sources on [[string theory]] see at _[[books about string theory]]_ or see the _[[string theory FAQ]]_.

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Course I. Topics in string phenomenology

## Course II. Orientifolds, and the search for the Standard Model in string theory

## Course III. Lectures on supersymmetry breaking,

## Course IV. Supersymmetry and the real world

## Course V. Cosmology and fundamental theory

## Course VI. Spontaneous breaking of space-time symmetries

## Course VII. The standard model from D-branes in string theory

## Course VIII. Non-renormalization theorems in superstring and supergravity theories

## Course IX. Preparing the LHC experiments for first data

## Course X. String theory, gravity and experiment

## Course XI. Aspects of Hagedorn holography

## Course XII. Lectures on constructing string vacua

by [[Frederik Denef]]


### 1. Introduction

### 2. Basics of string vacua

* [[moduli stabilization]]

* [[landscape of string theory vacua]]

### 3. F-theory and type IIB orientifold compactifications

* [[type II string theory]]

* [[orientifold]]

* [[F-theory]]

### 4. Type IIB/F-theory flux vacua

### 5. A geometrical toolkit

### 6. Statistics of flux vacua

### 7. Explicit realizations of moduli stabilization



## Course XIII Gauge-string dualities and some applications

* [[KLT relations]]


category: reference