
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
#### Higher algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea


The [[Dold-Kan correspondence]] [[stabilization|stabilizes]]
to identify _unbounded_ [[chain complexes]] with certain [[spectra]].


## Statement

### In terms of stably simplicial abelian groups

with the category of stably simplicial abelian groups.
The latter are closely related to [[combinatorial spectrum|combinatorial spectra]] of [[Daniel Kan]] and can be defined as stably simplicial objects in the category of abelian groups.
More precisely, we have the following definitions.

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition
The category of _stable simplices_ has integer numbers as objects.
Given two objects $k$ and $l$, the set of morphisms
from $k$ to $l$ is the set of order-preserving maps $h$
from the set of natural numbers to itself
such that $h(k+1)=h(k)+1$ for all but a finite number of $k$.
Morphisms are composed by composing the corresponding maps.
=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition
A _stably simplicial abelian group_ is a presheaf $F$ of abelian groups
on the category of stable simplices
such that for any integer $k$ every element $x$ of $F(k)$
belongs to the kernels of all but a finite number of degeneracy maps.
Morphisms of stably simplicial abelian groups are morphisms
of presheaves.
=--

The following theorem was established in 1963 by [[Daniel Kan]]
in his paper “Semisimplicial spectra” (see Proposition 5.8):

+-- {: .num_theorem}
###### Theorem
The [[category of unbounded chain complexes]] is [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] to the
category of stably simplicial abelian groups,
with equivalences being given by the same functors
as in the unstable Dold-Kan correspondence, but appropriately
extended to the above categories.
=--

Similarly to the unstable case,
the above categories, when interpreted as ∞-categories,
are also equivalent to the ∞-category of module spectra over
the Eilenberg-MacLane ring spectrum of the integers.
See the section _[stable Dold-Kan correspondence](module+spectrum#StableDoldKanCorrespondence)_
at _[[module spectrum]]_.

### In terms of EM-module spectra

For $R$ an ordinary [[ring]], write $H R$ for the corresponding [[Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]]. 

+-- {: .num_theorem #StableDoldKan}
###### Theorem

For $R$ any [[ring]] (or [[ringoid]], even) there is a [[Quillen equivalence]] 

$$
  H R Mod \simeq Ch_\bullet(R Mod)
$$

between a model structure on  $H R$-[[module spectra]] over the [[Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]] $H R$ and the [[model structure on unbounded chain complexes]] of ordinary $R$-[[modules]].

This presents a corresponding [[equivalence of (∞,1)-categories]]. If $R$ is a [[commutative ring]], then this is an equivalence of [[symmetric monoidal (∞,1)-categories]].

=--

This equivalence on the level of [[homotopy categories]] is due to ([Robinson](#Robinson)). The refinement to a [[Quillen equivalence]] is ([SchwedeShipley, theorem 5.1.6](#SchwedeShipley)). See also the discussion at _[[stable model categories]]_. A direct description as an [[equivalence of (∞,1)-categories]] appears as ([[Deformation Theory|Lurie DT, theorem 7.1.2.13]]).

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The [[forgetful functor|forgetful]] [[(∞,1)-functor]] $H R Mod \longrightarrow $ [[Spectra]] preserves [[(∞,1)-limits]], so that (after [[simplicial localization]] $L$) we have an [[(∞,1)-functor]]

$$
  DK
  \;\colon\;
  L_{qi} Ch_\bullet(R) 
    \stackrel{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  H R Mod
   \stackrel{}{\longrightarrow}
  Spectra
$$

from the [[(∞,1)-category of chain complexes]] to the [[(∞,1)-category of spectra]] which preseres [[(∞,1)-limits]]. In particular therefore a [[presheaf]] of [[chain complexes]] (as it appears in [[abelian shef cohomology]]/[[hypercohomology]]) which satisfies [[descent]] (for some given [[(∞,1)-site]] structure, hence which is an [[(∞,1)-sheaf]]/[[∞-stack]] of chain complexes) maps under the stable Dold-Kan correspondence $DK$ to an [[(∞,1)-sheaf of spectra]].

=--



+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

For $X$ a [[topological space]] and $R$ a ring, let $C_\bullet(X, R)$ be the standard [[chain complex]] for [[singular homology]] $H_\bullet(X, R)$ of $X$ with coefficients in $R$.

Under the stable Dold-Kan correspondence, prop. \ref{StableDoldKan}, this ought to be identified with the [[smash product]] $(\Sigma^\infty_+ X) \wedge H R$ of the [[suspension spectrum]] of $X$ with the [[Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]]. Notice that by the general theory of [[generalized homology]] the [[homotopy groups]] of the latter are again singular homology

$$
  \pi_\bullet( (\Sigma^\infty_+ X) \wedge H R) \simeq H_\bullet(X, R)
  \,.
$$

While the correspondence $(\Sigma^\infty_+ X) \wedge H R \sim C_\bullet(X,R)$ under the above equivalence is suggestive, maybe nobody has really checked it in detail. It is sort of stated as true for instance on <a href="http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/arxiv/pdf/0906/0906.5198v1.pdf#page=15">p. 15 </a> of ([BCT](#BCT)).

=--

### Monoidal version in terms of EM-module specta

More in detail we have the following statement.

Let $R := H \mathbb{Z}$ be the [[Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]] for the [[integers]]. 

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

There is a zig-zag of [[monoidal Quillen adjunction|lax monoidal]] [[Quillen equivalences]]

$$
  H \mathbb{Z} Mod
    \stackrel{\overset{Z}{\longrightarrow}}{\underset{U}{\leftarrow}}
  Sp^\Sigma(sAb)
    \stackrel{\overset{L}{\leftarrow}}{\underset{\phi^* N}{\longrightarrow}}
  Sp^\Sigma(Ch_+)
   \stackrel{\overset{D}{\longrightarrow}}{\underset{R}{\leftarrow}}
  Ch_\bullet
  \,,
$$

between [[monoidal model categories]] satisfying the [[monoid axiom in a monoidal model category]]:

* the model structure for $H \mathbb{Z}$-[[module spectra]];

* the [[model structure on symmetric spectrum objects]] in [[simplicial abelian group]]s and in [[chain complex]]es;

* and the [[model structure on chain complexes]] (unbounded).

This induces a [[Quillen equivalence]] between the corresponding [[model structures on monoids]] in these [[monoidal category|monoidal categories]], which on the left is the model structure on $H \mathbb{Z}$-algebra spectra and on the right the [[model structure on dg-algebras]]:

$$
  H \mathbb{Z} Alg \simeq dgAlg_\mathbb{Z}
  \,.
$$

=--

This is due to ([Shipley](#Shipley)). The corresponding [[equivalence of (∞,1)-categories]] for $R$ a commutative rings with the intrinsically defined [[(∞,1)-category]] of [[En-algebra|E1-algebra]] objects on the left appears as ([[Higher Algebra|Lurie HA, prop. 7.1.4.6]]).

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

This is a stable version of the [[monoidal Dold-Kan correspondence]]. See there for more details.

=--

## Related concepts

* [[∞-Dold-Kan correspondence]]

## References

* {#Robinson} Alan Robinson, _The extraordinary derived category_ , Math. Z. 196 (2) (1987) 231–238.
 
* {#SchwedeShipley} [[Stefan Schwede]], [[Brooke Shipley]], _Stable model categories are categories of modules_ , Topology 42 (2003), 103-153 ([pdf](http://www.math.uic.edu/~bshipley/classTopFinal.pdf))

* {#Shipley} [[Brooke Shipley]], _$H \mathbb{Z}$-algebra spectra are differential graded algebras_ , Amer. Jour. of Math. 129 (2007) 351-379. ([arXiv:math/0209215](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0209215))
 

* {#BCT} [[Andrew Blumberg]], [[Ralph Cohen]], [[Constantin Teleman]], _Open-closed field theories, string topology and Hochschild homology_ ([arXiv:0906.5198](http://arxiv.org/abs/0906.5198))
 
* [[Jacob Lurie]], section 7.1.4 of _[[Higher Algebra]]_

* [[Jacob Lurie]], _[[Deformation Theory]]_ 
 