
# Decidable and stable equality
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Definitions

In [[constructive mathematics]], a [[set]] $X$ has __decidable equality__ if any two elements of $X$ are either [[equality|equal]] or [[negation|not]] equal.  Equivalently, $X$ has decidable equality if its [[equality]] relation is a [[decidable subset]] of $X \times X$.  Sometimes one says that such a set $X$ is _discrete_, although of course this term has many meanings.  Of course, in [[classical mathematics]], every set has decidable equality.  But the concept generalises in [[sheaf and topos theory|topos theory]] to the notion of [[decidable object]].

More generally, $X$ has __stable equality__ if any two elements of $X$ are equal if they are not unequal.  Equivalently, $X$ has stable equality if its equality relation is its own [[double negation]].  Every set with decidable equality must also have stable equality.


## Applications

Working with decidable subsets of sets with decidable equality makes constructive mathematics very much like classical mathematics.  This is why constructivism has few consequences for basic combinatorics and algebra (although it does have important consequences for more advanced topics in those fields).  In analysis, in contrast, constructivism matters right away, because the set of [[real numbers]] may not have decidable equality.  However, the set of [[located real numbers]] does have stable equality.


[[!redirects decidable equality]]
[[!redirects stable equality]]
