
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Complex geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include complex geometry - contents]]
=--
#### Differential cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include differential cohomology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

> under construction

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The generalization of the concept of [[Jacobian variety]] to higher dimensional [[algebraic varieties]].

In [[differential geometry]] these appear as [[moduli spaces]] of [[flat infinity-connection|flat]] [[circle n-bundles with connection]] that are equipped with [[symplectic structure]] and [[Kähler polarization]] induced from any choice of [[complex structure]] on the base space. Via the [[Koszul-Malgrange theorem]], this translates to [[abelian sheaf cohomology]] of a suitable ([[complex variety|complex]]) [[variety]] with coefficients in the [[structure sheaf]].

## Examples

### Of elliptic curves

... [[moduli space of flat connections]]... [[Hitchin connection]]... [[modular functor]]... [[WZW model]]...

### Of Calabi-Yau 3-folds

A review of intermediate Jacobians of [[Calabi-Yau varieties]] of ([[complex manifold|complex]]) [[dimension]] 3 is in ([Baarsma 11, section 2](#Baarsma11)).

The (real) dimensional of the intermediate Jacobian of a CY3 $X$ is 

$$
  dim (J(X)) = 2(1+ h^{1,2})
$$

(e.g. [Baarsma 11, (2.21)](#Baarsma11))

Hence the intermediate Jacobian of a rigid CY3 (with $h^{1,2} = 0$) is an [[elliptic curve]] (e.g. [BKNPP 09, (1.8)](#BKNPP09)).

### $n = 3$: supergravity C-field

For the moment see at _[[7d Chern-Simons theory]]_ and at _[[M5-brane]]_.

### $n = 3$: type II 3-form 

For the [[RR-field]] component in degree 4 of [[type IIA superstring theory]]: ([Morrison 95](#Morrison95))


## Related concepts

[[!include moduli of higher lines -- table]]


## References

### General

Original articles include

* {#Griffiths68a} [[Phillip Griffiths]], _Periods of integrals on algebraic manifolds. I_ Construction and properties of the modular varieties", American Journal of Mathematics 90 (2): 568–626, (1968) doi:10.2307/2373545, ISSN 0002-9327, JSTOR 2373545, MR 0229641

* {#Griffiths68a} [[Phillip Griffiths]],  _Periods of integrals on algebraic manifolds. II_ Local study of the period mapping", American Journal of Mathematics 90 (3): 805–865 (1968), doi:10.2307/2373485, ISSN 0002-9327, JSTOR 2373485, MR 0233825

Reviews and surveys include

* Wikipedia, _[Intermediate Jacobian](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intermediate_Jacobian)_

* [[Patrick Walls]], _Intermediate Jacobians and Abel-Jacobi maps_, 2012 ([[WallsJacobian.pdf:file]])

* {#Brylinski07} [[Jean-Luc Brylinski]], section I.6 of _Loop Spaces, Characteristic Classes and Geometric Quantization_ Springer, 2007

### For Calabi-Yau 3-folds

* C. Herbert Clemens, [[Phillip Griffith]], _The intermediate Jacobian of the cubic threefold_, Annals of Mathematics Second Series, Vol. 95, No. 2 (Mar., 1972), pp. 281-356 ([JSTOR](http://www.jstor.org/stable/1970801))





* [[Claire Voisin]] ([pdf](http://www.math.polytechnique.fr/~voisin/Articlesweb/griffithsgroup.pdf))

Applications in [[string theory]]:


* {#Morrison95} [[David Morrison]], section 4 of _Mirror Symmetry and the Type II String_, Nucl.Phys.Proc.Suppl. 46 (1996) 146-155 ([arXiv:hep-th/9512016](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9512016))

* {#BKNPP09} Ling Bao, Axel Kleinschmidt, Bengt E. W. Nilsson, Daniel Persson, Boris Pioline, _Instanton Corrections to the Universal Hypermultiplet and Automorphic Forms on SU(2,1)_, Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 4 (1), 187-266 (2010) ([arXiv:0909.4299](http://arxiv.org/abs/0909.4299))

* {#Baarsma11} A. Baarsma, _The hypermultiplet moduli space of compactified type IIA string theory_, Master Thesis, Utrecht 2011 ([web](http://dspace.library.uu.nl/handle/1874/203182))

[[!redirects intermediate Jacobians]]