
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
#### Group Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include group theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

U-duality is a kind of [[duality in string theory]].

The [[KK-compactifications]] of [[11-dimensional supergravity]] to lower dimensional [[gauged supergravity]] theories have global/local [[gauge groups]] given by [[split real forms]] of the $E$-series of the [[exceptional Lie groups]].

Here the [[compact space|compact]] [[exceptional Lie groups]] form a series [[E8]],[[E7]], [[E6]]

$$
  E_8, E_7, E_6
$$

which is usefully thought of to continue as

$$
  E_5 := Spin(10), E_4 := SU(5), E_3 := SU(3) \times SU(2)
  \,.
$$

The [[split real forms]] of this are traditionally writte

$$
  E_{8(8)}, E_{7(7)}, E_{6(6)}
$$

and one sets

$$
  E_{5(5)} := Spin(5,5), E_{4(4)} := SL(5, \mathbb{R}), 
  E_{3(3)} := SL(3, \mathbb{R}) \times SL(2, \mathbb{R})
  \,.
$$

For instance the [[scalar fields]] in the field [[supermultiplet]] of $3 \leq d \leq 11$-dimensional supergravity have [[moduli spaces]] parameterized by the [[homogeneous spaces]] 

$$
  E_{n(n)}/ K_n
$$

for 

$$
  n = 11 - d
  \,,
$$

where $K_n$ is the [[maximal compact subgroup]] of $E_{n(n)}$:

$$
  K_8 \simeq Spin(16), K_7 \simeq SU(8), K_6 \simeq Sp(4)
$$

$$
  K_5 \simeq Spin(5) \times Spin(5), 
  K_4 \simeq Spin(5),
  K_3 \simeq SU(2) \times SO(2)
  \,.
$$

Therefore $E_{n(n)}$ acts as a [[global symmetry]] on the supergravity fields and more generally certain [[subgroups]] of it are "gauged" (have [[gauge fields]]) in [[gauged supergravity]] version.

So for instance maximal [[3d supergravity]] has global (and in fact also local, see there) gauge group given by (the [[split real form]] of) [[E8]].

This is no longer verbatim true for their [[UV-completion]] by the corresponding [[Kaluza-Klein mechanism|compactifications]] of [[string theory]] (e.g. [[type II string theory]] for [[type II supergravity]], etc.). Instead, on these a [[discrete group|discrete subgroup]]

$$
  E_{n(n)}(\mathbb{Z}) \hookrightarrow E_{n(n)}
$$

acts as global symmetry. This is called the **U-duality** group of the supergravity theory.

It has been argued that this pattern should continue in some way further to the remaining values $0 \leq d \lt 3$,
with "[[Kac-Moody groups]]" [[E9]]. [[E10]], [[E11]] corresponding to the [[Kac-Moody algebras]]

$$
  \mathfrak{e}_9, \mathfrak{e}_10, \mathfrak{e}_{11}
  \,.
$$

Continuing in the other direction to $d = 10$ ($n = 1$) connects to the [[T-duality]] group $O(d,d,\mathbb{Z})$ of [[type II string theory]].

See the references ([below](#UDualityReferences)).

## Properties

### Relation to T-duality and S-duality

U-duality may be understood as being the combination of [[T-duality]] for the compactification torus and [[S-duality]] of [[type IIB superstring theory]]. see ([West 12, section 17.5.4](#West12)).

## Related concepts

* [[duality in string theory]]

  * [[T-duality]]

  * [[S-duality]]

  * **U-duality**

## References
 {#References}

Quick surveys include

* [[Jacques Distler]], _Split real forms_ ([blog post](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/~distler/blog/archives/001213.html)).

Reviews focusing on [[gauged supergravity]] include

* {#Samtleben08} [[Henning Samtleben]], _Lectures on Gauged Supergravity and Flux Compactifications_ ([arXiv:0808.4076](http://arxiv.org/abs/0808.4076))

with slides in

* {#Samtleben07} [[Henning Samtleben]], _Gauged supergravity and U-duality_, 2007  ([pdf](http://www.desy.de/uni-th/stringth/ggfl/talks/Samtleben.pdf))

and reviews with more [[M-theory]] lore include also

* {#West12} [[Peter West]], section 17.5.4 _Introduction to Strings and Branes_, Cambridge University Press 2012

* N.A. Obers B. Pioline, _U-duality and M-Theory_, Phys.Rept. 318 (1999) 113-225 ([arXiv:hep-th/9809039](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9809039))

* {#Roest04} Diederik Roest, _M-theory and Gauged Supergravities_, Fortsch.Phys.53:119-230,2005 ([arXiv:hep-th/0408175](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0408175))


The $E_{7(7)}$-symmetry was first discussed in 

* [[Bernard de Wit]], [[Hermann Nicolai]], _$D = 11$ Supergravity With Local $SU(8)$ Invariance_, Nucl. Phys.
B 274, 363 (1986)

and $E_{8(8)}$ in 

* [[Hermann Nicolai]], _$D = 11$ Supergravity with Local $SO(16)$ Invariance_ , Phys. Lett. B 187, 316 (1987).

* K. Koepsell, [[Hermann Nicolai]], [[Henning Samtleben]], _An exceptional geometry for $d = 11$
supergravity?_, Class. Quant. Grav. 17, 3689 (2000) ([arXiv:hep-th/0006034](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0006034)).

The discrete quantum subgroups were discussed in 

* [[Chris Hull]], [[Paul Townsend]], _Unity of Superstring Dualities_ Nucl.Phys.B438:109-137 (1995) ([arXiv:hep-th/9410167](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9410167))

which also introduced the term "U-duality".

Review and further discusssion is in 

* Shun'ya Mizoguchi, Germar Schroeder, _On Discrete U-duality in M-theory_, Class.Quant.Grav. 17 (2000) 835-870 ([arXiv:hep-th/9909150](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9909150))

A careful discussion of the topology of the U-duality groups is in 

* [[Arjan Keurentjes]], _The topology of U-duality (sub-)groups_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0309106](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0309106))

* [[Arjan Keurentjes]], _U-duality (sub-)groups and their topology_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0312134](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0312134))

A discussion in the context of [[generalized complex geometry]] / [[exceptional generalized complex geometry]] is in 

* Paulo Pires Pacheco, [[Daniel Waldram]], _M-theory, exceptional generalised geometry and superpotentials_ ([arXiv:0804.1362](http://arxiv.org/abs/0804.1362))

* Nicholas Houston, _Supergravity and Generalized Geometry_ Thesis (2010) ([pdf](https://workspace.imperial.ac.uk/theoreticalphysics/Public/MSc/Dissertations/2010/Nicholas%20Houston%20Dissertation.pdf))

The case of "$E_{10}$" is discussed in 

* [[Thibault Damour]], [[Marc Henneaux]], [[Hermann Nicolai]], _$E(10)$ and a 'small tension expansion' of M
theory_, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 221601 (2002) ([arXiv:hep-th/0207267](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0207267));

* [[Axel Kleinschmidt]], [[Hermann Nicolai]], _$E(10)$ and $SO(9,9)$ invariant supergravity_, JHEP 0407,
041 (2004) ([arXiv:hep-th/0407101](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0407101))

and that of "$E_{11}$" in 

* [[Peter West]], _$E_{11}$ and M-theory_, Class. Quant. Grav. 18, 4443 (2001) ([arXiv:hep-th/0104081](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0104081)).

General discussion of the [[Kac-Moody groups]] arising in this context is for instance in 

* Philipp Fleig, [[Axel Kleinschmidt]], _Eisenstein series for infinite-dimensional U-duality groups_ ([arXiv:1204.3043](http://arxiv.org/abs/1204.3043))