
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _orbit category_ of a [[group]] $G$ is the category of "all kinds" of  [[orbits]] of $G$, namely of all suitable [[coset spaces]] regarded as [[G-spaces]]. 

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn #TheOrbitCategory}
###### Definition

Given a [[topological group]] $G$ the __orbit category__ $\operatorname{Or}G$ (denoted also $\mathcal{O}_G$) is the [[category]] whose 

* objects are the [[homogeneous space]]s ($G$-orbit types) $G/H$, where $H$ is a closed [[subgroup]] of $G$, 

* and whose morphisms are $G$-equivariant maps.  

=--

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

For suitable continuous [[actions]] of $G$ on a [[topological space]] $X$, every [[orbit]] of the action is [[isomorphism|isomorphic]] to one of the [[homogeneous spaces]] $G/H$ (the [[stabilizer group]] of any point in the orbit is conjugate to $H$). This is the sense in which def. \ref{TheOrbitCategory} gives "the category of all $G$-orbits".

=--

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

Def. \ref{TheOrbitCategory} yields a [[small category|small]] [[enriched category|topologically enriched]] category (though of course if $G$ is a [[discrete group]], the enrichment of $\operatorname{Or}G$ is likewise discrete).  

Of course, like any category, it has a [[skeleton]], but as usually defined it is not itself skeletal, since there can exist distinct subgroups $H$ and $K$ such that $G/H\cong G/K$.


=--

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

Warning: This should not be confused with the situation where a group $G$ acts on a groupoid $\Gamma$ so that one obtains the  [[orbit groupoid]].   

=--

More generally, given a family $F$ of subgroups of $G$ which is closed under conjugation and taking subgroups one looks at the full subcategory $\mathrm{Or}_F\,G \subset \operatorname{Or}G$ whose objects are those $G/H$ for which $H\in F$.


## Variants

Sometimes a family, $\mathcal{W}$, of subgroups is specified, and then a subcategory of $\operatorname{Or}G$ consisting of the $G/H$ where $H\in \mathcal{W}$ will be considered. If the trivial subgroup is in $\mathcal{W}$ then many of the considerations of results such as [[Elmendorf's theorem]] will go across to the restricted setting.

## Properties

### Relation to $G$-spaces and Elmendorf's theorem

[[Elmendorf's theorem]] (see there for details) states that the [[(∞,1)-category of (∞,1)-presheaves]] on the orbit category $Orb_G$ are [[equivalence of (∞,1)-categories|equivalent]] to the [[localization of an (∞,1)-category|localization]] of [[topological spaces]] with $G$-[[action]] at the "fixed point weak equivalences".

$$
  L_{we} G Top \simeq PSh_\infty(Orb_G)
  \,.
$$


### Relation toequivariant homotopy theory

The $G$-orbit category is the [[slice (∞,1)-category]] of the [[global orbit category]] $Orb$ over the [[delooping]] $\mathbf{B}G$:

$$
  Orb_G \simeq Orb_{/\mathbf{B}G}
  \,.
$$

This means that in the general context of [[global equivariant homotopy theory]], the orbit category appears as follows.

[[!include equivariant homotopy theory -- table]]


### Relation to Mackey functors

Orbit categories are used often in the treatment of [[Mackey functor]]s from the theory of [[locally compact group]]s and in the definition of [[Bredon cohomology]]. 

### Relation to Bredon equivariant cohomology

It appears in [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]], where the $H$-fixed [[homotopy groups]] of a space form a [[presheaf]] on the [[homotopy category]] of the orbit category (e.g. [page 8, 9 here](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/PAPERS/Newthird.pdf#page=8)).


### Relation to the category of groups, homomorphisms and conjugations

See at _[[global equivariant homotopy theory]]_.

## Related concepts

* [[global orbit category]], [[global equivariant stable homotopy theory]]

* [[Bredon cohomology]]




## References

* {#May96} [[Peter May]], section I.4 of _Equivariant homotopy and cohomology theory_ CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics, vol. 91, Published for the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, Washington, DC, 1996. With contributions by M. Cole, G. Comezana, S. Costenoble, A. D. Elmenddorf, J. P. C. Greenlees, L. G. Lewis, Jr., R. J. Piacenza, G. Triantafillou, and S. Waner. ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/u/faculty/doug/otherpapers/alaska1.pdf))

A very general setting for the use of orbit categories is described in

* [[W. G. Dwyer]] and [[D. M. Kan]], _Singular functors and realization functors_ , Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Indag. Math., 87, (1984), 147 – 153. 

For more on the relation to [[global equivariant homotopy theory]] see 

* [[Charles Rezk]], _[[Global Homotopy Theory and Cohesion]]_

[[!redirects orbit categories]]