# Subsequential spaces
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A **subsequential space** is a set equipped with a notion of _sequential convergence_, giving it a "topology" in an informal sense.

Any [[topological space]] (or more generally, any [[pseudotopological space]]) becomes a subsequential space with its standard notion of convergence, but only for a [[sequential space]] can the topology be recovered from sequential convergence.  In the other direction, not every subsequential space is induced by a topological one.  Despite these apparent drawbacks, subsequential spaces have a number of advantages; see below.


## Definition

A **subsequential space** is a set $X$ equipped with a relation between sequences and points, called "converges to," with the following properties.

1. For every $x\in X$, the constant sequence $(x)$ converges to $x$.

2. If a sequence $(x_n)$ converges to $x$, then so does any subsequence of $x$.

3. If, for some sequence $(x_n)$ and some point $x$, every subsequence of $(x_n)$ contains a further subsequence converging to $x$, then $(x_n)$ itself converges to $x$.

The final property can be stated less [[constructive mathematics|constructively]] as "if $(x_n)$ does not converge to $x$, then there is a subsequence $(x_{n_k})$ of $(x_n)$ such that no subsequence of $(x_{n_k})$ converges to $x$."

Note that this definition matches the definition of [[pseudotopological space]] except for the restriction to sequences instead of general [[net]]s.  Accordingly, one may call a subsequential space a __sequential pseudotopological space__.

Subsequential spaces are also known as Kuratowski _limit spaces_, or _L-spaces_; see [Menni](#Menni).

A subsequential space is said to be **sequentially [[Hausdorff space|Hausdorff]]** if each sequence converges to at most one limit.


## Properties

The definition of a subsequential space is arguably easier and more intuitive than that of a [[topological space]].  Continuity of functions between subsequential spaces is likewise easy to define by preservation of convergent sequences.

As mentioned above, the category $SeqTop$ of [[sequential space|sequential (topological) spaces]] is a full reflective subcategory of the category $SeqPsTop$ of subsequential spaces. Thus, subsequential spaces include many spaces of interest to topologists, including all [[metric space|metrizable]] spaces and all [[CW complex|CW complexes]], and so they can be regarded as a sort of [[nice topological space]].

Not every subsequential space is a sequential (topological) space, but somewhat surprisingly, every sequentially Hausdorff subsequential space _is_ necessarily a sequential space.  Note, though, that while any Hausdorff space is sequentially Hausdorff, the converse is not true even for sequential spaces (though it is true for first-countable spaces).  Also of note is that $SeqTop$ is coreflective in $Top$.

Furthermore, $SeqPsTop$ is _also_ a [[nice category of spaces]]: it is [[locally cartesian closed category|locally cartesian closed]] and in fact a [[quasitopos]].  Since it is a "Grothendieck quasitopos" (the category of presheaves on a category which are [[sheaf|sheaves]] for one [[Grothendieck topology]] and separated for another one), it is also [[locally presentable category|locally presentable]].  In particular, it is [[complete category|complete]] and cocomplete, and has a small [[generator|generating set]].

Of course, the embedding of $SeqTop$ in $SeqPsTop$ preserves all [[limit]]s, since it has a left adjoint, but somewhat surprisingly it also preserves many [[colimit]]s.  In particular, it preserves all the colimits used in the construction of a CW complex; thus it makes no difference whether you carry out the construction of a CW complex in $Top$ and then regard the result as a subsequential space, or carry out the construction in $SeqPsTop$ to begin with.

It follows that the [[geometric realization]] functor from [[simplicial set]]s can equally well be regarded as landing in $Top$, $SeqTop$, or $SeqPsTop$.  Of course, it has a singular complex functor as a right adjoint in any of these three cases.  In the cases of $SeqTop$ and $SeqPsTop$, geometric realization actually preserves all finite limits; in fact it and the singular complex functor form a [[geometric morphism]] between $SimpSet$ and a Grothendieck topos that contains $SeqPsTop$ as a reflective subcategory (the "[[topological topos]]" of Johnstone's paper).  Recall that geometric realization landing in $Top$ doesn't even preserve finite products, unless we replace $Top$ by (for instance) compactly generated spaces.

These properties of subsequential spaces should be compared with analogous ones for [[convergence space]]s and their relatives, such as [[pseudotopological space]]s.  The category $Conv$ of convergence spaces is also a complete and cocomplete quasitopos (hence, in particular, locally cartesian closed) and includes *all* of $Top$ as a reflective subcategory.  However, $Conv$ is not locally presentable and has no generator, and while the embedding of $Top$ into $Conv$ also preserves all limits (since it has a left adjoint), it actually preserves _fewer_ colimits than the embedding of $SeqTop$ into $SeqPsTop$.  In particular, it does _not_ preserve the colimits used in the construction of CW complexes: if you carry out the construction of a CW complex in $Conv$, in general the result won't even be a topological space.


## References

* P. T. Johnstone, _On a topological topos_.  Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 38 (1979) 237--271

* Matias Menni and Alex Simpson, _Topological and Limit-space Subcategories of
Countably-based Equilogical Spaces_, 2001. [PDF](http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/als/Research/Sources/subcats.pdf)

[[!redirects L-space]]
[[!redirects L-spaces]]
[[!redirects limit space]]
[[!redirects limit spaces]]
[[!redirects subsequential space]]
[[!redirects subsequential spaces]]
[[!redirects sequential pseudotopological space]]
[[!redirects sequential pseudotopological spaces]]
[[!redirects sequential convergence space]]