
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Complex geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include complex geometry - contents]]
=--
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Frölicher spectral sequence_ is the [[spectral sequence of a double complex]] of the [[Dolbeault cohomology|Dolbeault]] [[double complex]] $(\Omega^{\bullet,\bullet}, \partial, \bar \partial)$ of a [[complex analytic space]] $X$. It converges to the complex [[de Rham cohomology]] and hence may be thought of as interpolating between that and [[Dolbeault cohomology]]. In particular on a [[compact topological space|compact]] [[Kähler manifold]] $X$ the Frölicher spectral sequence degenerates on the $E_1$-page and exhibits the [[Hodge filtration]] (see [here](Hodge%20structure#HodgeFiltrationForComplexSpaceReproducesKaehlerHodgeStructure)) on its complex de Rham cohomology. Therefore the higher differentials of the Frölicher spectral sequence may be thought of as witnessing [[obstructions]] to $X$ admitting a Kähler structure.

Write $\Omega^\bullet$ for the [[holomorphic de Rham complex]].
The Frölicher spectral sequence has the form

$$
  E_1^{p,1}
  =
  (H^q(X,\Omega^p), \partial)
   \Rightarrow
  H^{p+q}(X, \Omega^\bullet)
$$

with $E_\infty^{p,q} = Gr^p H^{p+q}(X)$ the [[associated graded]] of the [[Hodge filtration]]

$$
  F^p H^k(X,\mathbb{C})
  \coloneqq
  im\left(
    H^k(X, \Omega^{\bullet \geq p})
   \to 
    H^k(X, \Omega^\bullet)
  \right)
  \,.
$$

+-- {: .num_theorem }
###### Theorem

If $X$ is [[compact topological space|compact]] and carries the structure of a [[Kähler manifold]], then the Frölicher spectral sequence degenerates at $E_1$.

=--

Traditionally this was proven ([Frölicher 55](#Frolicher55)) by way of  [[harmonic differential forms]].  In ([Deligne-Illusie 87](#DeligneIllusie87)) this is proven instead by reduction to [[positive characteristic]].

## Related concepts

* [[Hodge-de Rham spectral sequence]]

## References

Original articles include

* {#Frolicher55} [[Alfred Frölicher]], _Relations between the cohomology groups of Dolbeault and topological invariants_, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 41: 641–644 (1955)

* {#DeligneIllusie87} [[Pierre Deligne]], [[Luc Illusie]] _Relèvements modulo $p^2$ et decomposition du complexe de de Rham_, Invent. Math. 89 (1987), no. 2, 247-270.

Further developments include

* Laura Bigalke, Sönke Rollenske, _The Frölicher spectral sequence can be arbitrarily non degenerate_, Math. Ann., 341(3), 623--628, 2008 ([arXiv:0709.0481](http://arxiv.org/abs/0709.0481))

A textbook account is in

* {#Voisin02} [[Claire Voisin]], section 8.3.3 of _[[Hodge theory and Complex algebraic geometry]] I,II_,  Cambridge Stud. in Adv. Math. __76, 77__, 2002/3

* {#Voisin} [[Claire Voisin]], _Hodge theory and the topology of compact Kähler and complex projective manifolds_ ([pdf](http://www.math.columbia.edu/~thaddeus/seattle/voisin.pdf))


[[!redirects Frolicher spectral sequence]]