
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Universes
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include universe - contents]]
=--
#### Foundations
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

An **inaccessible cardinal** is a [[cardinal number]] $\kappa$ which cannot be "accessed" from smaller cardinals using only the basic operations on cardinals.  It follows that the collection of sets smaller than $\kappa$ satisfies the axioms of set theory.


## Definition

An **inaccessible cardinal** is a [[cardinal number|regular strong limit cardinal]].  Here, $\kappa$ is _regular_ if every sum of $\lt\kappa$ cardinals, each of which is $\lt\kappa$, is itself $\lt\kappa$; $\kappa$ is a _strong limit_ if $\lambda\lt \kappa$ implies $2^\lambda\lt\kappa$.  In other words, the class of sets of cardinality $\lt\kappa$ is closed under the operations of indexed [[union]]s and taking [[power set]]s.

By this definition, $0$ (the cardinality of the [[empty set]]), $1$ (the cardinality of the [[point]]), and $\aleph_0$ (the cardinality of the set of [[natural number]]s) are all inaccessible.  Usually one explicitly requires inaccessible cardinals to be uncountable, so as to exclude these cases.  One can also justify excluding $0$ and $1$ by interpreting the requirement that $1 \lt \kappa$ as the nullary part of a requirement whose binary part is closure under indexed unions.

A __weakly inaccessible cardinal__ is a regular weak limit cardinal; sometimes inacessible cardinals are called _strongly inaccessible_ in contrast.  Here, $\kappa$ is a _weak limit_ if $\lambda\lt\kappa$ implies $\lambda^+\lt\kappa$, where $\lambda^+$ is the smallest cardinal number $\gt\lambda$.  Every strongly inaccessible cardinal is also weakly inaccessible, while the converse is true assuming the [[continuum hypothesis]].  A weakly inaccessible cardinal may be strengthened to produce a (generally larger) strongly inaccessible cardinal.

+--{: .query}
[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: What does that last sentence mean?  It seems obviously false to me in the absence of CH.

_Toby_:  It means that if a weakly inaccessible cardinal exists, then a strongly inaccessible cardinal exists, but I couldn\'t find the formula for it.  Something like $\beth_\kappa$ is strongly inaccessible if $\kappa$ is weakly inaccessible (note that $\aleph_\kappa = \kappa$ then), but I couldn\'t verify that (or check how it holds up in the absence of choice).

[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: I don't believe that.  Suppose that the smallest weakly inaccessible is not strongly inaccessible, and let $\kappa$ be the smallest strongly inaccessible.  Then $V_\kappa$ is a model of set theory in which there are weakly inaccessibles but not strong ones.  I'm almost certain there is no reason for the smallest weakly inaccessible to be strongly inaccessible.

JCMcKeown: Surely $\beth_\kappa$ has cofinality at most $\kappa$, so it can't be regular.  Maybe the strengthening involves some forcing or other change of universe? E.g., you can forcibly shift $2^\lambda = \lambda^+$ for $\lambda \lt \kappa$, and then by weak inaccessibility, etc... I *think*.  Don't trust me. ---- (some days later) More than that: since the ordinals are well ordered, if there is any strongly inaccessible cardinal *greater* than $\kappa$, then there is a *least* one, say $\theta$.  Then $V_\theta$ is a universe with a weakly inaccessible cardinal and no greater strongly inaccessible cardinal. Ih! Mike said that already... So whatever construction will have to work the other way around: if there is a weakly inaccessible cardinal that isn't strongly inaccessible, and if furthermore a weakly inaccessible cardinal implies a strongly inaccessible cardinal, then the strongly inaccessible cardinal implied must be less than $\kappa$.  And that sounds really weird.
=--


## Properties

A cardinal $\kappa$ is inaccessible precisely when the $\kappa$th level $V_\kappa$ of the [[von Neumann hierarchy]] is a [[Grothendieck universe]]  ([Williams](#Williams)), and hence in particular itself a model of axiomatic [[set theory]].  For this reason, the existence of inaccessible cardinals cannot be proven in ordinary axiomatic set theory such as [[ZFC]].  The axiom asserting that there exists an inaccessible (which amounts to the existence of a Grothendieck universe) is thus the beginning of the study of [[large cardinal]]s.  If one thinks of $\aleph_0$ as already an inaccessible cardinal, then the [[axiom of infinity]] may be seen as itself the first large cardinal axiom.


## References

The proof that a [[Grothendieck universe]] is equivalently a set of $\kappa$-small sets for $\kappa$ an inaccessible cardinal is in 

* N. H. Williams, _On Grothendieck universes_, Compositio Mathematica, tome 21 no 1 (1969) ([numdam]( http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CM_1969__21_1_1_0))
 {#Williams}


[[!redirects inaccessible cardinal]]
[[!redirects inaccessible cardinals]]
[[!redirects weakly inaccessible cardinal]]
[[!redirects weakly inaccessible cardinals]]

[[!redirects strong inaccessible cardinal]]
[[!redirects strong inaccessible cardinals]]