+-- {: .query}
This is a test to migrate the timeline of category theory and related mathematics from Wikipedia to nLab.

Reason: No one really contributes to it at wikipedia

If i had started a little later when nLab existed i would write in nLab from the start.

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: I like this idea. Why is the timeline here only 3 items long at the moment? Was there some technical problem with the migration? Should we all invest energy into migrating more of the material, or are you planning to do this?

Rafael: I am just learning the nLab wiki syntax and rules. A preview when you edit an entry would be of enormous help. If i just cut and paste i have no idea how the wikipedia syntax will be interpreted. Hence i expect a lot of work. It is also a little more work than just cut and paste: the links must be changed/renamed to make more sense. If you know how to automate the copying process or any good idea how to efficiently migrate please help me out. It sounds like you know an easy way Urs.

I only included a start since i did this late by night with a problem how to start a new entry, a new syntax and a lot of waiting.

That nLab works very slowly don't help. At least it is so on my computer and i think the fault is not at my end.
=--

#Timeline#

|Year| |Contributors     | |Event|
|----|-|-----------------|-|-----|
|1890| |[[David Hilbert]]| |[[resolution of modules|Resolution]] and free resolution of modules|
|1890| |[[David Hilbert]]| |[[Hilbert syzygy theorem]]|
|1893| |[[David Hilbert]]| |[[nullstellensatz|Fundamental theorem of algebraic geometry]] also called Hilbert Nullstellensatz. It was later reformulated to: the category of [[affine variety|affine varieties]] over a field $k$ is equivalent to the [[opposite category|dual]] of the category of reduced finitely generated (commutative) $k$-[[associative unital algebra|algebras]]|

#Unclassifiable by year#
* EGA (Éléments de géométrie algébrique)
* FGA (Fondements de la Géometrie Algébrique)
* SGA ([[Grothendieck]]'s Séminaire de géométrie algébrique)

#Literature#