## Idea ##

Given an extensional relation on a set, two elements are equal if they cannot be distinguished by the structure of the set of elements that they are related to, that those elements are related to, and so on forever in one direction.

## Definition ##

Let $\prec$ be a binary [[relation]] on a [[set]] $S$, and let $\prec^*$ be its reflexive-[[transitive closure]] (a [[preorder]]).  Given an element $x$ of $S$, let $S_x$ be the [[downset]] of $x$ under $\prec^*$, equipped with the restriction of $\prec$.

The relation $\prec$ is __extensional__ if, given any elements $x$ and $y$ of $S$, $x = y$ whenever $S_x$ and $S_y$ are isomorphic as sets equipped with a relation $\prec$.

### Simplification for well-founded relations ###

This idea is most often used when $\prec$ is a [[well-founded relation]]; then we can use a simpler criterion.

A well-founded relation $\prec$ is __extensional__ if, given any elements $x$ and $y$ of $S$, $x = y$ whenever (for all $t$) $t \prec x$ if and only if $t \prec y$.

One can prove by induction that this is equivalent to the previous definition.

### Loose version ###

The definition for well-founded relations is a kind of [[antisymmetric relation|antisymmetry]] condition:  Let $x \leq y$ mean that $t \prec y$ whenever $t \prec x$.  Then $\leq$ is clearly a [[preorder]]; it\'s antisymmetric (so a [[partial order]]) if and only if $\prec$ is extensive.

Suppose that (short of extensionality) if $t \prec x$ if and only if $t \prec y$ for all $t$, then $x \prec z$ if and only if $y \prec z$ for all $z$.  If $\sim$ is the [[equivalence relation]] generated by $\leq$, then $\prec$ induces an extensional relation on the [[quotient set]] $S/{\sim}$.

## Morphisms ##

Let $S$ and $T$ be sets, each equipped with an extensional relation $\prec$.  Then a [[function]] $f: S \to T$ is a __morphisms__ of sets so equipped if it always induces [[isomorphism]]s (of sets equipped with an arbitrary binary [[relation]] on each) from $S_x$ to $S_{f(x)}$.

The interesting thing about extensional relations is that any such morphism must be unique.  That is, we have a (large) [[poset]] of sets equipped with extensional relations.

## Applications ##

Well-founded relations are often used to represent [[axiom of foundation|well-founded]] [[pure set]]s.  In this case, where $\prec$ represents the 'membership' relation $\in$, a restriction to extensional such relations corresponds to imposing the [[axiom of extensionality]] (that two sets are equal if they have the same elements).  For non-well-founded sets, the more complicated definition of extensionality must be used.

A well-founded relation that is both extensional and [[transitive relation|transitive]] is precisely a [[well-order]].