
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

### In terms of exact functors

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

Given a [[ring]] (or $k$-algebra) $A$, a left $A$-[[module]], say $M$, is __flat__ if [[tensoring]] with $M$ over $A$ as a [[functor]] from left $A$-modules to left $A$-modules is an [[exact functor]] (sends [[short exact sequences]] to short exact sequences).  

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remarks

* Tensoring with $M$ is automatically right exact, so it is equivalent to require that tensoring with $M$ be left exact.  Since [[Mod]] is [[finitely complete category|finitely complete]], this is also equivalent to requiring that tensoring with $M$ be a [[flat functor]].

* On an [[abelian category]], the notions of _[[exact functor]]_ and _[[flat functor]]_ coincide.

* The ring may be taken non-unital without any change.

=--

### In terms of identities

There is a characterisation of flatness that says that a left $A$-module $M$ is flat if and only if "everything (that happens in $M$) happens for a reason (in $A$)".

The meaning of this is a akin to the existence of bases in vector spaces.  In a vector space, say $V$, if we have an identity of the form $\sum_i \alpha_i v_i = 0$ then we cannot necessarily assume that the $\alpha_i$ are all zero.  However, if we choose a basis then we can write each $v_i$ in terms of the basis elements, say $v_i = \sum_j \beta_{i j} u_j$, and substitute in to get $\sum_{i j} \alpha_i \beta_{i j} u_j = 0$.  Now as $\{u_j\}$ forms a basis, we can deduce from this that for each $j$, $\sum_i \alpha_i \beta_{i j} = 0$.  These last identities happen in the coefficient field, which is standing in place of $A$ in the analogy.

When translating this into the language of modules we cannot use bases so we have to be a little more relaxed.  The following statement is the right one.

Suppose there is some identity in $M$ of the form $\sum_i a_i m_i = 0$ with $m_i \in M$ and $a_i \in A$.  Then there is a family $\{n_j\}$ in $M$ such that every $m_i$ can be written in the form $m_i = \sum_j b_{i j} n_n$ and the coefficients $b_{i j}$ have the property that $\sum_i a_i b_{i j} = 0$.

The module $M$ being flat is equivalent to being able always to do this.

This observation (Wraith, Blass) can be put into the more general context of modelling [[geometric theory|geometric theories]] by [[geometric morphism|geometric morphisms]] from their [[classifying topos|classifying toposes]], or equivalently, certain [[flat functor|flat functors]] from [[site|sites]] for such topoi.


[[!redirects flat modules]]
