
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition 

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A [[category]] $C$  with finite [[products]] $(-)\times(-)$ and [[coproducts]] $(-) + (-)$ is called (finitary) **distributive** if for any $X,Y,Z\in C$ the canonical [[distributivity]] morphism
$$ X\times Y + X\times Z \to X\times (Y+Z)$$
is an isomorphism.  The canonical morphism is the unique morphism such that $X\times Y \to X\times (Y+Z)$ is $X\times i$, where $i\colon Y\to Y +Z$ is the coproduct injection, and dually for $X\times Z \to X\times (Y+Z)$.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

This notion is part of a hierarchy of [[distributivity for monoidal structures]], and generalizes to [[distributive monoidal categories]] and [[rig categories]].  A [[linearly distributive category]] is _not_ distributive in this sense.

=--

This axiom on binary coproducts easily implies the analogous $n$-ary result for $n\gt 2$.  In fact it also implies the analogous 0-ary statement that the projection
$$ X\times 0 \to 0$$
is an isomorphism for any $X$ (see Corollary \ref{nullary} below).  Moreover, for a category with finite products and coproducts to be distributive, it actually suffices for there to be *any* [[natural transformation|natural]] family of isomorphisms $X\times Y + X\times Z \cong X\times (Y+Z)$, not necessarily the canonical ones; see the paper of Lack referenced below.

A category $C$ with finite products and all small coproducts is **infinitary distributive** if the statement applies to all small coproducts.  One can also consider $\kappa$-distributivity for a [[cardinal number]] $\kappa$, meaning the statement applies to coproducts of cardinality $\lt\kappa$.

Any [[extensive category]] is distributive, but the converse is not true.

## Properties 

+-- {: .num_prop #monic} 
###### Proposition 
In a category with products and coproducts, if products distribute over binary coproducts, then [[coproduct]] [[coprojections]] are [[monomorphism|monic]]. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
Let $i_B: B \to B + C$ be a coproduct coprojection, and suppose given maps $f, g: A \to B$ such that $i_B f = i_B g$. We observe that the coprojection 

$$i: A \times B \to A \times B + A \times C$$ 

is monic because it has a [[retraction]] $(1_{A \times B}, \phi): A \times B + A \times C \to A \times B$. (All we need here is the existence of a map $\phi: A \times C \to A \times B$, for example the composite $A \times C \stackrel{\pi_A}{\to} A \stackrel{\langle 1_A, f \rangle}{\to} A \times B$.)  

The composite of the coprojection $i$ with the canonical isomorphism $A \times B + A \times C \cong A \times (B + C)$, namely $1_A \times i_B: A \times B \to A \times (B + C)$, is therefore also monic. Given that $\langle 1_A, i_B f \rangle = \langle 1_A, i_B g \rangle: A \to A \times (B + C)$, we conclude 

$$(1_A \times i_B)\langle 1_A, f \rangle = \langle 1_A, i_B f \rangle = \langle 1_A, i_B g \rangle = (1_A \times i_B)\langle 1, g \rangle,$$ 

whence $\langle 1_A, f\rangle = \langle 1_A, g\rangle: A \to A \times B$ since $1_A \times i_B$ is monic. It follows that $f = g$, as was to be shown. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_cor #nullary} 
###### Corollary 
If products distribute over binary coproducts, then products distribute over nullary coproducts (i.e., the projection $X \times 0 \to 0$ is an isomorphism for all objects $X$). 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
Clearly for any $Y$ the hom-set $\hom(X \times 0, Y)$ is inhabited by $X \times 0 \to 0 \to Y$, and so we only need show that any two $f, g: X \times 0 \to Y$ are equal. By Proposition \ref{monic}, it suffices that any two $f, g: X \times 0 \to X + Y$ are equal. 

The coproduct inclusion $X \hookrightarrow X \times 0 + X$ is an isomorphism $X \cong X \times 1 \cong X \times (0 + 1) \cong X \times 0 + X \times 1 \cong X \times 0 + X$, so that the projection 
$$\hom(X \times 0, A) \times \hom(X, A) \to \hom(X, A)$$ 
is an isomorphism of sets for any object $A$. As soon as $\hom(X, A)$ is inhabited, this means $\hom(X \times 0, A)$ must be a singleton. In particular, $\hom(X \times 0, X + Y)$ is a singleton, which is just what we wanted. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_prop} 
###### Proposition  
In a distributive category, the [[initial object]] is [[strict initial object|strict]]. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
Given an arrow $f: A \to 0$, we have that $\pi_A: A \times 0 \to A$ is a retraction of $\langle 1, f \rangle: A \to A \times 0$, so that $A$ is a retract of $A \times 0 \cong 0$. But retracts of initial objects are initial. 
=-- 

## Related concepts

* [[distributive law]]

* [[distributivity for monoidal structures]]

  * [[distributive monoidal category]]

  * [[bipermutative category]]

  * [[linearly distributive category]]

  * [[rig category]]

## References 

* [[Aurelio Carboni]],  and [[Stephen Lack]],  and [[Robert F. C. Walters]], _Introduction to extensive and distributive categories_,  Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 84 (1993) 145-158, 

* [[Stephen Lack]], _Non-canonical isomorphisms_.  [arXiv:0912.2126](http://arxiv.org/abs/0912.2126).



[[!redirects distributive categories]] 
