#Idea#

An _$A_\infty$-operad_ is an [[operad]]/[[multicategory]] over some enriching category $C$ which is a (free) [[homological resolution|resolution]] of the standard associative operad enriched over $C$.

Famous examples include

* the topological operad of Stasheff associahedra;

* the free resolution  in the context of dg-operads of the linear associative [[operad]] $A$.



#The topological Stasheff associahedra operad#

##Definition##

Let $\{K_n\}$ be the sequence of [[associahedron|Stasheff associahedra]]. This is naturally equipped with the structure of a [[multicategory]] -- a non-symmetric [[operad]] -- enriched over [[Top]], usually denoted $K$ (it seems). 

A [[topological space]] $X$ is called an **$A(\infty)$-space** if it admits an action of $K$, i.e. if $\{X_n\}$ is (equipped with the structure of) an [[algebra over an operad]] for $K$.



##References##

The original article that defines associahedra and in which the operad $K$ that gives $A(\infty)$-topological spaces is implicit is

* Stasheff, _Homotopy associative H-spaces I_, _II_, Trans. Amerk. Math. Soc. 108 (1963), 275-312

A textbook discussion (slightly modified) is in section 1.6 of the book

* Martin Markl, Steve Shnider, Jim Stasheff, _Operads in Algebra, Topology and Physics_ ([web](http://books.google.de/books?id=fMhZjT9lQo0C&pg=PA56&lpg=PA56&dq=Stasheff+associahedra&source=bl&ots=ZuGXjT4zbp&sig=V-taGG2LHS0msHK-PTxmUXXCvEY&hl=de#PPP1,M1))




#The dg-$A_\infty$-operad#

##Definition##

Recall that the linear associative operad $A$ is the 
operad in vector spaces generated by a single binary operation
$$
  \array{
    \searrow && \swarrow
    \\
    & * 
    \\
    & \downarrow
  }
$$
modulo the ideal generated by the element
$$
  \array{
    \searrow && \swarrow &&&& \swarrow
    \\
    & * && 
    \\
a    && \searrow && \swarrow
    \\
    &&& *
    \\
    &&&
    \downarrow
  }
  -
  \array{
    \searrow && &&\searrow && \swarrow
    \\
    &  &&&& * 
    \\
    && \searrow && \swarrow
    \\
    &&& *
    \\
    &&&
    \downarrow
  }  
  \,.
$$

We may regard this operad as in operad enriched in 
[[cochain complex]]es $Ch^\bullet(Vect)$ and concentrated in degree 0.


+--{: .un_defn}
######Definition

The (dg-)**$A_\infty$-operad** is the dg-operad

* freely generated from one $n$-ary operation $f_n$ for each $n \geq 1$, taken to be in degree
$2 - n$;

* with the differential of the $n$th generator given by
$$ -
\sum_{j+p+q = n}^{1 \lt p \lt n} (-1)^{j p + q} a_{p,j,n} ,$$
where $a_{p,j,n}$ is $f_p$ attachched to the $(j+1)$st input of $f_{n}$.
=--

+--{: .un_prop}
######Proposition
([Markl 94](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9411208) , [proposition 3.3](http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/hep-th/pdf/9411/9411208v1.pdf#page=13)).

The dg-$A_\infty$-operad is the free resolution of the linear associative operad $A$ in the context of dg-operads.
=--

##Remarks##

* The dg-$A_\infty$-operad is _isomorphic_ to the operad of top-dimensional chains on the topological Stsheff associahedra operad. This is discussed on [pages 26-27](http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/hep-th/pdf/9411/9411208v1.pdf#page=26) of [Markl 94](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9411208)



##Properties##

* An [[algebra over an operad|algebra]] over $A_\infty$ is an $A_\infty$-[[A-infinity-algebra|algebra]].

* A [[category over an operad|category]] over $A_\infty$ is an $A_\infty$-[[A-infinity-category|category]].



## References ##

* Martin Markl, _Models for operads_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9411208))

section 1.18 of

* Yu. Bespalov, V. Lyubashenko, O. Manzyuk, _Pretriangulated $A_\infty$-categories_, Proceedings of the Institute of Mathematics of NAS of Ukraine, vol. 76, Institute of Mathematics of NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, 2008, 598 ([ps.gz](http://www.math.ksu.edu/~lub/cmcMonad.gz))

A relation of the linear dg-$A_\infty$-operad to the Stasheff associahedra is in the proof of proposition 1.19 in Bespalov et al.



***

### Discussion ###

A previous version of this entry started the following discussion:

+--{: .query}
[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: Evidently some people use the terminology this way, but for many people there is no 'the' $A_\infty$-operad.  Rather _an_ $A_\infty$-operad is any operad equivalent to the associative operad (in whatever enrichment we are working).  Likewise, an $A_\infty$-algebra is an algebra for _some_ $A_\infty$-operad.

If we want a page about this particular operad, could we call it maybe [[standard linear A-infinity-operad]]?  Or [[linear Stasheff operad]] since, as Jim Stasheff pointed out at the cafe, it is the operad of cellular chains on the standard topological $A_\infty$-operad of associahedra?

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: i have tried to expand on this now (was in a haste yesterday) -- would it make sense to keep all the examples listed here on one page, the way I have it now?

=--
