See [[simplicial nerve of simplicial categories]].

category: redirect

+-- {: .query}
Is there a simplicial nerve that\'s not of simplicial categories?  If not, I\'d put the article here instead of there.  ---Toby

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: yes, it seems to be called just "simplicial nerve" in the literature, but I found that a bit undescriptive, since every nerve is "simplicial" and here the point is really that we take the nerve _of_ a simplicial category. I also seem to recall that [[Tim Porter|Tim]] said he doesn't like the term "simplicial nerve". Maybe Tim should decide, he is probably the one among us who has thought about this notion the most.

_Toby_:  Ah, I see how 'simplicial nerve' is confusing; so how about just [[nerve of a simplicial category]]?

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: right, that might be the best option -- I have to run now, maybe you can implement that?

_Toby_:  I\'ll wait to hear from Tim.

[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: Not all nerves are simplicial; it depends on what you are taking the nerve of.  The nerve of a multicategory is a dendroidal set (a presheaf on the category of trees).  The nerve of a compact symmetric multicategory is a presheaf on the category of Feynman graphs.  And an $n$-category has a nerve that is a simplicial set, but also one that is a $\Theta_n$-set and one that is an $n$-fold simplicial set.

FWIW, I have sometimes seen the "simplicial nerve of simplicial categories" called the "homotopy coherent nerve," which to me captures the intuition better.

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: true, I actually know that not every notion of nerve is simplicial, should have thought before typing. 

Now that you mention it, maybe [[Tim Porter]] also said he favored "homotopy coherent nerve"? I'll send him an email.

=--

