**Simplicial models for weak $\omega$-categories** -- sometimes called [[simplicial weak omega-category|simplicial weak omega-categories]] -- are a way  study weak $\omega$-[[omega-category|categories]] through their [[nerve]]s.  In effect, the goal is to _define_ a weak $\omega$-category to be a certain sort of ([[stratified simplicial set|stratified]]) simplicial set.  One could then hope to prove that these are precisely the [[nerve|nerves]] of weak $\omega$-categories defined in some other way.

This program was originally begun by Ross Street and has been carried forward by Dominic Verity with the theory of [[weak complicial set]]s.  It is expected that the (nerves of) weak $\omega$-categories will be weak complicial sets satisfying an extra "saturation" condition ensuring that "every [[equivalence]] is [[thin element|thin]]."


***

Discussion on a previous version of this entry:

+--{: .query}
[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: This term is kind of unfortunate; *simplicial weak $\omega$-category* could also mean a simplicial object in weak $\omega$-categories.  I don't suppose we can do anything about that?

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: my impression is that what Dominic Verity mainly wants to express with the term is "simplicial model for weak $\omega$-category". Maybe we could/should use a longer phrase like that?

[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: That would make me happier.

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: okay, I changed it. Let me know if this is good now.

_Toby_:  But what about 'globular $\omega$-category' and things like that?  Doesn\'t 'simplicial $\omega$-category' fit right into that framework?  This page title sounds like an entire framework for defining $\omega$-category rather than a single $\omega$-category simplicially defined.

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: i am open to suggestions -- but notice that it does indeed seem to me that Dominic Verity wants to express  "an entire framework for defining $\omega$-category", namely the framework where one skips over the attempt to define $\omega$-categories and instead tries to find a characterization of what should be their nerves.

_Toby_:  OK, that fits in with most of what\'s written here, but not the beginning
>**Simplicial models for weak $\omega$-categories** -- sometimes called [[simplicial weak omega-category|simplicial weak omega-categories]] -- are [...]
Maybe that was just poorly written, but it threw me off.
Should it be
>A **simplicial model for weak $\omega$-categories** -- which are then sometimes called [[simplicial weak omega-category|simplicial weak omega-categories]] -- is [...]
or even
>A **simplicial model for weak $\omega$-categories** is [...]
and only later mention [[simplicial weak omega-category|simplicial weak omega-categories]]?

[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: You're right that 'simplicial $\omega$-category' it fits into 'globular $\omega$-category' and 'opetopic $\omega$-category' and so on.  It seems more problematic in this case, though, since simplicial objects of random categories are a good deal more prevalent than globular ones and opetopic ones.  But perhaps I should just live with it.  
=--
