
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Compact objects
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include compact object - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

An object $X$ of a category $C$ is said to be [[finitely presentable object|finitely presentable]] (or finitary, sometimes called [[compact object|compact]]) if the [[representable functor]] $C(X,-)$ preserves [[filtered colimits]]. Write $C_{fp}$ for the full subcategory of $C$ on the finitely presentable objects.

+--{: .query}
[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: Do people really call finitely presentable _objects_ "finitary"?  I've only seen that word applied to functors (those that preserve filtered colimits).

Toby: I have heard 'finite'; see [[compact object]].

_Mike_: Yes, I've heard 'finite' too.
=--

A category $C$ satisfying (any of) the following equivalent conditions is said to be __locally finitely presentable__ (or **lfp**):

1. $C$ has all small [[colimit|colimits]], the category $C_{fp}$ is [[essentially small category|essentially small]], and any object in $C$ is a [[filtered colimit]] of the canonical diagram of finitely presentable objects mapping into it.
1. $C$ is the category of models for an [[essentially algebraic theory]].  Here an 'essentially algebraic theory' is a small category $D$ with finite limits, and its category of 'models' is the category of finite-limit-preserving functors $D \to Set$.
1. $C$ is the category of models for a finite limit [[sketch]].
1. $C_{fp}$ has finite colimits, and the restricted [[Yoneda embedding]] $C\hookrightarrow [C_{fp}^{op},Set]$ identifies $C$ with the category of finite-limit-preserving functors $C_{fp}^{op} \to Set$.

Replacing "finite" by "of cardinality less than $\kappa$" everywhere, for some [[cardinal number]] $\kappa$, results in the notion of a [[locally presentable category]].

   +-- {: .query}

   [[Toby Bartels|Toby]]: In the list of equivalent conditions above, does this essentially algebraic theory also have to be finitary?; that is, if it\'s an [[algebraic theory]], then it\'s a [[Lawvere theory]]?  
   
   [[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: Yes, it certainly has to be finitary.  Possibly the standard meaning of "essentially algebraic" implies finitarity, though, I don't know.

   _Toby_:  I wouldn\'t use 'algebraic' that way; see [[algebraic theory]].

   [[John Baez]]: How come the first sentence of [this paper](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/10/20/10-20.pdf) seems to suggest that the category of models of _any_ essentially algebraic theory is locally finitely presentable?  The characterization below, which I did not write, seems to agree.  Here there is no restriction that the theory be finitary.  Does this contradict what Mike is saying, or am I just confused?  

   _Mike_: The syntactic category of a non-finitary essentially algebraic theory is not a category with finite limits but a category with $\kappa$-limits where $\kappa$ is the arity of the theory.  A finitary theory can have infinitely many sorts and operations; what makes it finitary is that each operation only takes finitely many inputs, hence can be characterized by an arrow whose domain is a finite limit.  I think this makes the first sentence of that paper completely consistent with what I'm saying.
   =--


## Examples

* [[Set]], Graph, [[Pos]], [[Cat]], [[Ab]] are all lfp.

* [[Top]], [[FinSet]] are not lfp.

[[!redirects locally finitely presentable categories]]
[[!redirects lfp category]]
[[!redirects lfp categories]]

[[!redirects finitely presentable category]]
[[!redirects finitely presentable categories]]
