Centipede mathematics (as defined by [[James Dolan]] and quoted in [TWF 145](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/week145.html)) is where you take a mathematical concept and strip away parts of it to see if it can still function. In other words, you see how many legs you can pull off before the centipede can no longer walk.

For example, you can start with the concept of [[abelian group]] and try removing some things:
* remove commutativity to get [[group]]s;
* then remove inverses to get [[monoid]]s;
* or remove associativity instead of inverses to get [[loop(algebra)|loops]];
* etc.

What still works?  Abelian groups form an [[abelian category]], while groups only form a [[semi-abelian category]], so [[cohomology]] gets more complicated (see [[nonabelian cohomology]]) but still makes sense.  Monoid [[representation]]s (say on [[vector space]]s) make as much sense as group representations, but loop representations are not apparently meaningful.  Describing homomorphisms and presentations of monoids takes a little more care than for groups, while the naïve definitions continue to work for loops.  Sometimes things actually work better; [[group object]]s make sense only in a [[cartesian monoidal category]], while [[monoid object]]s make sense in any [[monoidal category]].  By seeing what are the salient features for making sense of things like cohomology and representation theory, we also see that we can generalise these, not by simply removing clauses from the definition of group, but by reworking the concept into such things as [[category|categories]] or [[quantum group]]s.

Centipede mathematics in the context of [[foundations]] is often called __reverse mathematics__.  Here we remove axioms from [[set theory]] (or some other form of foundations) and consider what theorems can still be proved, which can be proved if reformulated into (obviously) classically equivalent forms, and which are lost entirely (ideally provably so).  On the Lab, some of us like to do this for [[constructive mathematics]], but it is also important for [[internalization]].  (Mainstream reverse mathematics has more to do with [[predicative mathematics]] than with either of these.)

Like '[[general abstract nonsense]]', the term 'centipede mathematics' can vary from tongue-in-cheek to derogatory.  Certainly there is little value in proving isolated theorems like 'Hemidemisemicontinous functions are Leibniz-integrable.' (both terms here are made up, to avoid insulting the creators of any real-life useless theorems) when one never really needs to integrate such general functions in such a restrictive way.  But sometimes thinking about what is really necessary points the way to really fruitful generalisations; like every judgement in mathematics, good taste is required.