#Idea#

A _semisimple category_ is a [[Vect]]-[[enriched category]] in which each object is a [[direct sum]] of finitely many [[simple object]]s.

#Definition#

A linear [[monoidal category]] (that is, a [[monoidal category]] [[enriched category|enriched over]] [[Vect]]) is called _semisimple_ if:
*  it has finite [[biproduct]]s (usually called '[[direct sum]]s'),
*  [[split idempotent|idempotents split]] (so we say that it 'has [[subobject]]s' or, perhaps better, 'has [[retract]]s'), and

+-- {: .query}

   What does it mean to 'have subobjects'?  (I assume that the 'direct sums' are [[biproduct]]s.)  ---Toby

   have subobjects = idempotents split and yes, finite biproducts. Simple objects are ones in which End(X) = k. 

   [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: shouldn't we say something like: a category is semisimple if each object is a direct sum of finitely many simple objects?

   [[Bruce Bartlett|Bruce]]: Urs, you're right, and that's indeed the way one morally thinks about it, but it's a less canonical way of proceeding. We ask ourselves: given a linear category with direct sums and subobjects, and a chosen maximal collection $\{X_i\}$ of nonisomorphic simple objects, how can we check if its semisimple? In the one way, we have to check whether a certain canonically defined map is an isomorphism. In the other way, we have to check if each object $V$ can be expressed as a direct sum of the $X_i$'s. Actually finding such a decomposition would be a noncanonical operation. So your shorter more snappy definition would force an auditor to perform an evil thing if he actually wanted to check it :-) It's that old thing about "only that part of a representation which behaves like an irreducible $\rho$ is canonical, the actual break-down of that rep into direct sums of $\rho$'s is noncanonical". That is, what is canonical is $Hom(V, X_i)$ and not $V = \bigoplus_i n_i X_i$.

   Also, if we just had "a category is semisimple if each object is a direct sum of finitely many simple objects" without the conditions on direct sums and subobjects then we could have someone who nastily removes, say, all three-dimensional vector spaces from $Vect$. It would still satisfy "each object is a direct sum of finitely many simple objects" but it shouldnt be regarded as a semisimple category since there are "holes".

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: okay, so "each object is finite sum of simples" is the _right idea_, while the _right defintion_ is a bit different. I have accoridngly now created a section "Idea" with the former statement. (Every entry should start with a section "Idea"!) See if you like this. Otherwise, feel free to adjust.

But in any case, it would be nice to have a discussion on how the "right definition" _implies_ that every object is isomorphic to a finite direct sum of representables.

=--

*  there exist [[object]]s $X_i$ labeled by an index set $I$ such that $Hom(X_i, X_j) \cong \delta_{ij} k$ where $k$ is the ground field (such objects are called _simple_) and such that for any two objects $V$ and $W$ in the category, the natural composition map
   \[
     \bigoplus_{i \in I} Hom(V, X_i) \otimes Hom(X_i, W) \rightarrow Hom(V, W)
   \]
   is an isomorphism.

Note that this definition implies that every object $V$ is a direct sum of simple objects $X_i$. This is because... 

+-- {: .query}
[[Bruce Bartlett|Bruce]] Gosh, I'm suddenly stuck at this point. I used to know this stuff. Can anyone help?
=--


#Remarks#

* This definition of semisimple (taken from the reference of M&uuml;ger below) does not use the concept of [[abelian category]]. This is because the concepts that one thinks about with abelian categories such as [[kernel]]s and [[cokernel]]s do not play an important conceptual role in semisimple categories, being replaced by the more important concepts of [[direct sum]] and [[subobject]] (or rather: [[retract]]) . Hence it is best to give a streamlined definition from first principles without going through the language of abelian categories which would have muddied the waters.

* For a category to be semisimple, it needs to have a certain directional symmetry in its hom-sets, namely that $Hom(V, W)$ must at least have the same dimension as$Hom(W,V)$. This is the easiest way to check if a category will _fail_ to be semisimple. For instance, the category $Rep(A)$ of representations of an algebra $A$ will rarely be semisimple, precisely because there is no relation between $Hom(V, W)$ and $Hom(W,V)$ in general. Again, this can be traced back to the original algebra $A$ not having any 'symmetry' like the inverse operation in a group. 

* As far as 'duality' on the hom-sets is concerned, one might have a $S: C \rightarrow C$ from the category to itself with the property that there are canonical isomorphisms
 \[
 Hom(V, W) \cong Hom(W, SV)^\vee
\]
where "$\vee$" denotes the ordinary linear dual of a vector space. Such a functor is called a _Serre functor_ in algebraic geometry, and indeed there is precisely such a functor on the derived category of coherent sheaves on a complex manifold --- it is given by tensoring with the canonical line bundle. 

* For [[2-Hilbert space|2-Hilbert spaces]], there is an antilinear $*$-operation on the hom-sets $* : Hom(V, W) \rightarrow Hom(W,V)$. The presence of this duality in fact forces the category to be semisimple (this comes down to the fact that a finite-dimensional $*$-algebra, such as the hom's between a bunch of objects in the category, must be a full matrix algebra)

#Examples#

* The archetypical simple example is [[Vect]] itself, the category of (finite dimensional!) vector spaces over some ground field $k$. This has a single isomorphism class of simple objects: given by $k$ itself.

* The category of [[representation theory|representation]]s of a compact Lie group $G$ is semisimple, with the simple objects being precisely the irreducible representations (this is the content of Schur's lemma). If $G$ is noncompact, one needs to pass from the concept of 'direct sum' to '[[direct integral]]'.

* Every [[fusion category]] is a semisimple category.

# References

* M. M&uuml;ger, [From Subfactors to Categories and Topology I. Frobenius algebras in and Morita equivalence classes of tensor categories](http://arxiv.org/math.CT/9812040). 




