
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topos Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

[[!redirects etendue]]
[[!redirects etendu]]

##Idea##

An **étendue** (also 'etendue', or 'etendu'; from French 'étendue' (fem.) - _extent_) is a [[topos]] $\mathcal{Y}$ that locally looks like the category of sheaves on a space:
>Briefly, the slogan is that $\mathcal{Y}$ is locally a topological space. (Lawvere 1976, p.129)

##History##

Originally defined by [[A. Grothendieck]] in ([[SGA4]], p.482) as a topos $\mathcal{Y}$ that has a well-supported object $X$ such that the slice $\mathcal{Y}/X$ is equivalent to a sheaf topos on a topological space, the definition was generalized by [[Lawvere]] (1975a,1976) by dropping the spatiality of the slice and require only that $\mathcal{Y}/X$ is a [[localic topos]].

Several site characterizations of étendues are known which come in two flavors, the first being the cancellation property of having an 'all monic' site betraying the origin of the concept as a mild generalization of the concept of space, the second is tied to the 'groupoidalness' of the site. Both ideas were already present in SGA4.

Étendues play an important role in Lawvere's approach to [[cohesion]] and the petit/[[gros topos]] distinction, where they provide one of the classes of [[petit toposes]] (generalized spaces). In this context, Lawvere (1989,1991) interprets the cancellative property of the site as enabling an interpretation of étendues as _categories of processes_. 

##Definition##

A topos $\mathcal{E}$ is called an _étendue_ if there is an object $X\in|\mathcal{E}|$ such that the (unique) $X\rightarrow 1$ is epic and the [[slice topos]] $\mathcal{E}/X$  is a [[localic topos]].[^fine]

[^fine]:  An epic $k:X\rightarrow Y$ induces a [[geometric morphism]] $k_\ast:\mathcal{E}/X\rightarrow \mathcal{E}/Y$ whose inverse image part, the change of base functor, $k^\ast:\mathcal {E}/Y\rightarrow\mathcal{E}/X$ is faithful, which means by definition that $k_\ast$ is a surjection, and if $Y=1$ one says that $\mathcal{E}/X$ _covers_ $\mathcal{E}$.

##Examples##

> The first example of an étendue seems to have been the [[space of moduli]] of algebraic curves, which is prevented from being globally a space due to the action of the [[Galois groups]] within each point. Yes, something vaguely reminiscent of particle spin is going on in such spaces, and the most naked form is that for any group G, the category $\mathcal{S}^G$ is an étendue with only one point! This is easily seen from the observations that $\mathcal{S}^G/G\cong\mathcal{S}^G$ and that $G\twoheadrightarrow 1$ where the last two $G$'s denote the regular representation.      (Lawvere 1976, pp.129-130)

##Properties##

* **Proposition**. A Grothendieck topos $\mathcal{Y}$ is an étendue iff there exists a [[site]] $(\mathcal{C}, J)$ for $\mathcal{Y}$ such that every morphism of $\mathcal{C}$ is monic.

* A Grothendieck topos is a Boolean étendue precisely if it satisfies the _internal [[axiom of choice]]_ (i.e. $(\quad)^X$ preserves epics for all objects $X$ ). An example of such a Boolean étendue would be $\mathcal{S}^G$ for $G$ a group.

##Related Concepts##
* [[localic topos]]
* [[petit topos]]
* [[gros topos]]


##References

* [[M. Artin]], [[A. Grothendieck]], [[J. L. Verdier]], _Théorie des Topos et Cohomologie Etale des Schémas (SGA 4)_, Springer LNM vol.269 (1972).

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _Sketches of an [[Elephant]] II_, Oxford UP 2002, pp.769-775.

* [[F. William Lawvere]], _Qualitative Distinctions between some Toposes of Generalized Graphs_ , Cont. Math. **92** (1989) pp.261-299.

* [[F. William Lawvere]], _[[Some Thoughts on the Future of Category Theory]]_ , pp.1-13 in Springer LNM vol. 1488 (1991).

* [[F. William Lawvere]], _Variable sets etendu and variable structure in topoi_ , Lecture notes University of Chicago 1975.

* [[F. William Lawvere]], _Variable quantities and variable structures in topoi_ , pp.101-131 in Heller, Tierney (eds.), Algebra, Topology and Category Theory, Academic Press New York 1976. 

* [[F. William Lawvere]], _Axiomatic Cohesion_ , TAC **19** no. 3 (2007) pp.41-49. ([pdf](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/19/3/19-03.pdf))

* [[F. William Lawvere]], _[[Como lectures]]_, Ms. 2008. ([pdf](http://comocategoryarchive.com/Archive/temporary_new_material/FWLawvere-Cohesive-Toposes-Como-January-2008.pdf))