
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A [[cobordism category]] of [[cobordisms]] equipped with [[conformal structure]].

One way to axiomatize [[conformal field theory]] (see there) in [[FQFT]]-style is as a suitable [[monoidal functor]] on a category of conformal cobordisms ([Segal 88](#Segal88)). 

## References

### General

* {#Segal88} [[Graeme Segal]], 

  _The definition of conformal field theory_ , in _Differential geometrical methods in theoretical physics_ (Como, 1987), NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. C Math. Phys. Sci., 250, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, (1988), 165-171

  _Two-dimensional conformal field theories and modular functors_ , in _Proceedings of the IXth International Congress on Mathematical Physics_ , Swansea, 1988, Hilger, Bristol (1989) 22-37.

  _The definition of conformal field theory_ , preprint, 1988; also in: _Topology, geometry and quantum field theory_ , ed. U. Tillmann, London Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser., Vol. 308. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2004) 421-577.


Review in the context of the [[Mumford conjecture]]:

* {#Madsen07} [[Ib Madsen]], section 2.2 of _Moduli spaces from a topological viewpoint_, Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematics, Madrid 2006 (2007) ([pdf](http://www.icm2006.org/proceedings/Vol_I/20.pdf))



[[!include D=2 CFT a functorial field theory -- references]]





[[!redirects conformal cobordism categories]]

[[!redirects conformal cobordism]]
[[!redirects conformal cobordisms]]

[[!redirects category of conformal cobordisms]]
[[!redirects categories of conformal cobordisms]]

