
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topos Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

[[!redirects Myhill-Schanuel topos]]
[[!redirects Schanuel Topos]]

# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

##Idea
The **Schanuel topos** (also called the _Myhill-Schanuel topos_) is the [[Grothendieck topos]] of "combinatorial functors" whose "typical objects are natural combinatorial constructions such as [[falling factorial|binomial coefficients]]"[^ref]. It plays an important role in [[computer science]] in the theory of [[name binding]] calculi and in [[William  Lawvere]]'s approach to [[petit toposes]]. It can be viewed as a [[category theory|category-theoretic]] variant of the [[Fraenkel-Mostowski model]] of [[set theory]].

[^ref]: Lawvere [1989, p.299](#Law89).

##Definition

The _Schanuel topos_ is the [[sheaf topos]] $Sh(FinSet^{op}_{mono},J)$ where $FinSet^{op}_{mono}$ is the opposite of the category of finite sets and monomorphisms and the coverage is the collection of all sieves generated by singletons $\{f\}\quad.$

##Properties

* The objects of the Schanuel topos are called [[nominal set|nominal sets]] and correspond precisely to the pullback preserving functors $FinSet_{mono}\to Set$.

* Since monos are precisely the morphisms that pull back along themselves to isomorphisms, any pullback preserving functor preserves monos. This affords another description as the category of intersection preserving functors from $FinSet_{mono}\to Set_{mono}$, a special case of [[combinatorial functor|combinatorial functors]].

* The Schanuel topos $Sh(FinSet^{op}_{mono},J)$ is [[atomic topos|atomic]] over $Set$ ([[Stephen Schanuel|S. Schanuel]], cf. (Wraith 1978), p.335) hence Boolean. This fact can be viewed as a reflex of the _urelements_ in Fraenkel-Mostowski set theory.

* $Sh(FinSet^{op}_{mono},J)$ is the [[classifying topos]] $Set[D_\infty]$ for the [[theory of decidable objects#Infinite decidable objects|theory of infinite decidable objects]] $D_\infty$ i.e. for a Grothendieck topos $\mathcal{E}$ geometric morphisms $\mathcal{E}\to Sh(FinSet^{op}_{mono},J)$ correspond to infinite [[decidable objects]] in $\mathcal{E}$. $Sh(FinSet^{op}_{mono},J)$ is equivalent to $Sh_{\neg\neg}([FinSet_mono,Set])$ where $[FinSet_mono,Set]$ classifies [[decidable object|decidable objects]].

* $Sh(FinSet^{op}_{mono},J)$ is the category of continuous actions for the group of bijections of $N$ equipped with the topology derived from the product topology for $\prod_{N}N\quad .$

* $Sh(FinSet^{op}_{mono},J)$ is the [[Kleisli category]] of the monad on the topos of [[species]] $Set^{FinSet_{iso}}$ induced by the inclusion of finite sets and bijections $FinSet_{iso}\hookrightarrow FinSet_{mono}$ (cf. Fiore-Menni 2004).

* $Sh(FinSet^{op}_{mono},J)$ is contractible in the sense of [[natural homotopy]] (cf. Joyal-Wraith [1984](#JW84)).

### Remark

For some information on the history of the Schanuel topos see section 10 of Menni ([2009, pp.529f](#Menni09)).

##Related Concepts

* [[nominal set]]

* [[locally decidable topos]]

* [[theory of decidable objects]]

* [[Fraenkel-Mostowski model]]

* [[combinatorial functor]]

* [[permutation model]]

* [[atomic topos]]

* [[species]]

##References

* [[Marcelo Fiore|M. Fiore]], [[Matias Menni|M. Menni]], _Reflective Kleisli Subcategories of the Category of Eilenberg-Moore Algebras for Factorization Monads_ , TAC **15** no. 2 (2004) pp.40-65. ([pdf](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/15/2/15-02.pdf))

* M. J. Gabbay, [[Andrew Pitts|A. M. Pitts]], _A new approach to abstract syntax with variable binding_, Formal Aspects of Computing **13** (2002) pp.341-363. ([draft](http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~amp12/papers/newaas/newaas-jv.pdf))

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _Sketches of an [[Elephant]] vols. I,II_, Oxford UP 2002. (pp.79f, 691, 925)

* {#JW84}[[André Joyal]], [[Gavin Wraith]], _Eilenberg-Mac Lane Toposes and Cohomology_ , pp.117-131 in Cont. Math. **92** AMS 1984.

* {#Law89}[[F. William Lawvere]], _Qualitative Distinctions between some Toposes of Generalized Graphs_ , Cont. Math. **92** (1989). (pp.298f)

* [[Saunders Mac Lane|S. Mac Lane]], [[Ieke Moerdijk|I. Moerdijk]], _Sheaves in Geometry and Logic_ , Springer Heidelberg 1994. (pp.155, 158)

* {#Menni03}[[Matías Menni]], _About N-quantifiers_ , Appl. Cat. Struc. **11** (2003) pp.421-445. ([preprint](https://sites.google.com/site/matiasmenni/newQuantifiers.pdf?attredirects=0))

* {#Menni09}[[Matías Menni]], _Algebraic categories whose projectives are explicitly free_ , TAC **22** no.20 (2009) pp.509-541. ([abstract](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/22/20/22-20abs.html))

* John Myhill, _Recursive equivalence types and combinatorial functions_ , Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. **64** (1958) pp.373-376.

* [[Sam Staton]], _Name-passing process calculi: operational models and structural operational semantics_, Technical Report **688** CL University Cambridge 2007. ([pdf](https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/techreports/UCAM-CL-TR-688.pdf))

* [[Gavin Wraith|G. Wraith]], _Intuitionistic Algebra: Some Recent Developments of Topos Theory_ , Proc. ICM Helsinki (1978) pp.331-337. ([pdf](http://www.mathunion.org/ICM/ICM1978.1/Main/icm1978.1.0331.0338.ocr.pdf))