
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Something weaker than a [[principal ideal domain]]: Not _every_ ideal is supposed to be principal, only the finitely generated ones should.

## Properties

In [[classical mathematics]], every [[Bézout domain]] $R$ that satisfies one of the following conditions is a [[principal ideal domain]]

1. $R$ is a [[unique factorization domain]]

2. $R$ is a [[Noetherian ring]]

3. $R$ is an [[atomic domain]]

## In constructive mathematics

In [[constructive mathematics]], many important rings may fail to be principal ideal domains in the naive sense. Bézout domains are usually better behaved.

For instance, the ring of integers is a principal ideal domain if and only if the [[excluded middle|law of excluded middle]] holds: In one direction, the usual proofs rely on being able to [[decidable proposition|decide]] whether any particular integer belongs to the ideal or not. 

For the converse, let $\varphi$ be an arbitrary proposition. Consider the ideal $\{ x \in \mathbb{Z} | (x = 0) \vee \varphi \}$. By assumption, it is generated by some number $n$. Since the integers are [[decidable equality|discrete]], it holds that $n = 0$ or $n \neq 0$. In the first case $\neg\varphi$ holds, in the second $\varphi$.

However, this ideal cannot be proved to be finitely generated either.  If an ideal is generated by $n_1, \ldots, n_k$, then we may form their [[gcd]] one step at a time, which we can do algorithmically.  Therefore, $\mathbb{Z}$ remains a Bézout domain.

## Examples

* The ring of integers $\mathbb{Z}$

* For any [[prime number]] $p$ and any [[finite field]] $\mathbb{F}_p$ of [[characteristic]] $p$, the [[polynomial ring]] $\mathbb{F}_p[x]$ on one generator

* The ring of [[entire function|entire]] [[holomorphic functions]] on the [[complex plane]]

## See also

* [[principal ideal domain]]

* [[function field analogy]]

## References

* Wikipedia, _[Bézout domain](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bézout_domain)

[[!redirects Bézout domains]]

[[!redirects Bezout domain]]
[[!redirects Bezout domains]]

