

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Ran space_ $Ran X$ of a [[space]], $X$, is the space of all [[finite set|finite]] [[subsets]] of $X$, equipped with geometric structure that knows about several coincident points merging to a single point.

The Ran space is defined, in [[topology|topological]] and [[algebraic geometry|algebro-geometric]] contexts, for instance in ([Lurie 14, lectures 7-9](#LurieTamagawaNumbers)). It is naturally a [[stratified space]] ([Ayala-Francis-Tanaka 14, section 3.7](#AyalaFrancisTanaka14))

It is named after [[Ziv Ran]].

## Properties

The Ran space of a [[connected space|connected]] [[manifold]] is [[weakly contractible space|weakly contractible]] ([BeilDrin04, p. 173](#BeilDrin04)).


## Examples


$$
  Ran_{2k+1}(S^1) \;\simeq\; S^{2k+1}
$$

([Bott 52](#Bott52), [Tuffley 02](#Tuffley02))

## Related concepts

* [[nonabelian Poincaré duality]]

* [[factorization algebra]]


## References

Apparently the concept of the Ran space was first introduced in

* {#BeilDrin04} [[Alexander Beilinson]], [[Vladimir Drinfeld]] , _Chiral algebras_, American Mathematical Society Colloquium Publications *51*, (2004).

Review includes

* {#AyalaFrancisTanaka14} [[David Ayala]], [[John Francis]], [[Hiro Lee Tanaka]], section 3.7 of _Local structures on stratified spaces_, Adv. Math. 307, 903-1028 (2017) ([arXiv:1409.0501](https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.0501))

Textbook accounts include

* [[Jacob Lurie]], section 5.5.1 of _[[Higher Algebra]]_

Ran spaces of the [[circle]] are discussed in 

* {#Bott52} [[Raoul Bott]], _On the third symmetric potency of $S^1$, Fund. Math. 39 (1952), 264–268 (1953)

* {#Tuffley02} Christopher Tuffley, _Finite subsets of $S^1$_, Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 2 (2002) 1119-1145 ([arXiv:math/0209077](https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0209077))

Rational functions as functions on the Ran space in the sense of functions on the complement of finitely many points as these range over all points, is discussed in

* {#Gaitsgory11} [[Dennis Gaitsgory]], _Contractibility of the space of rational maps_ ([arXiv:1108.1741](http://arxiv.org/abs/1108.1741))

Acyclicity of (some version of) the Ran space of a connected, [[quasi-projective scheme|quasi-projective]] [[scheme]] over an [[algebraically closed field]] is shown in lecture 10 of

* {#LurieTamagawaNumbers} [[Jacob Lurie]], _Tamagawa Numbers via Nonabelian Poincare Duality (282y)_, lecture notes, 2014, ([website](http://www.math.harvard.edu/~lurie/282y.html))

Discussion in the context of [[conformal field theory]] includes


* [[Pierre Deligne]], [[Pavel Etingof]], [[Dan Freed]], L. Jeffrey, [[David Kazhdan]], [[John Morgan]], [[David Morrison]] and [[Edward Witten]] (eds.) volume II, part III of _[[Quantum Fields and Strings]], A course for mathematicians_, 2 vols. Amer. Math. Soc. Providence 1999. ([web version](http://www.math.ias.edu/qft))


See also 

* [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ran_space)


[[!redirects Ran spaces]]

[[!redirects ran space]]
[[!redirects ran spaces]]