F. William Lawvere is the greatest category theorist of all time.  He invented [[Lawvere theory|Lawvere theories]] as a category-theoretic way to describe finitary [[algebraic theory|algebraic theories]].  He generalised [[Grothendieck topos]]es to elementary [[topos]]es, revolutionising the [[foundations]] of mathematics; in this vein, he developed the foundation [[ETCS]].  He also works on [[synthetic differential geometry]].  His motivation for all of this, believe it or not, is to better understand classical [[physics]].

+--{.query}

[[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: "The greatest". For me, it'd be a toss-up between Lawvere and Joyal. When it comes to foundational matters, or who is the greater axiomatizer, or the greatest of the early pioneers, yes, that would have to be Bill. But Andr&eacute; has the golden touch when it comes to applying category theory to reorganize a subject along conceptual structural lines; cf. species, generalized Galois theory, algebraic set theory, among much else. And, I believe he is the superior writer: elegant and crystal clear, whereas Bill is IMO (sometimes frustratingly) cryptic and terse. 

Keep in mind too that Joyal has far more to do than Lawvere with the inner development of higher category theory, which some of us here believe to be the most important thing going in CT today, even a new mathematics for the 21st century. 

Can't we just say "arguably the greatest" or "is, in the view of many, the greatest" or something? It's like one of those Michael Jordan/Shaquille O'Neal arguments: apples and oranges. 

=--

[web site](http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~wlawvere/)

category: biography