
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### $(0,1)$-Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include (0,1)-category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition


+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A __distributive lattice__ is a [[lattice]] in which [[join]] $\vee$ and [[meet]] $\wedge$ _distribute_ over each other, in that for all $x,y,z$ in the lattice, the _distributivity laws_ are satisfied:

*  $x \vee (y \wedge z) = (x \vee y) \wedge (x \vee z)$,
*  $x \wedge (y \vee z) = (x \wedge y) \vee (x \wedge z)$.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The nullary forms of distributivity follow automatically:

*  $x \vee \top = \top$,
*  $x \wedge \bot = \bot$.

Distributive lattices and [[lattice]] [[homomorphisms]] form a [[concrete category]] [[DistLat]].

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

Any lattice that satisfies one of the two binary distributivity laws must also satisfy the other; isn\'t that nice?  This convenience does *not* extend to infinitary distributivity, however.

=--



## Examples

Any [[Boolean algebra]], and even any [[Heyting algebra]], is a distributive lattice. 

Any [[linear order]] is a distributive lattice. 

An [[integral domain]] is a [[Prüfer domain]] iff its lattice of [[ideals]] is distributive. 

## Properties

### Finite distributive lattices
 {#OppositeCategory}

Let $FinDistLat$ be the category of finite distributive lattices and lattice homomorphisms, and let $FinPoset$ be the category of finite [[posets]] and order-preserving functions.  These are contravariantly equivalent, thanks to the presence of an [[ambimorphic object]]:

**Proposition.** The [[opposite category]] of $FinDistLat$ is [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] to $FinPoset$:

$$
  FinDistLat^{op} \simeq FinPoset
  \,.
$$

This equivalence is given by the functor

$$
  [-,2] \;\colon\; FinDistLat^{op} \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} FinPoset
$$

where $2$ is the 2-element distributive lattice, and

$$
  [-,2] \;\colon\; FinPoset^{op} \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} FinDistLat
$$

where $2 = \{0,1\}$ is the 2-element poset with $0 \lt 1$.

This is mentioned in 

* [[Gavin C. Wraith]], _Using the generic interval_, Cah. Top. Géom. Diff. Cat. **XXXIV** 4 (1993) pp.259-266. ([pdf](http://archive.numdam.org/ARCHIVE/CTGDC/CTGDC_1993__34_4/CTGDC_1993__34_4_259_0/CTGDC_1993__34_4_259_0.pdf))

### Categorification

Every distributive lattice, regarded as a [[category]] (a [[(0,1)-category]]), is a _[[coherent category]]_.  Conversely, the notion of coherent category may be understood as a [[categorification]] of the notion of distributive lattice.  A different categorification is the notion of [[distributive category]].

### Completion


The [[completely distributive lattice|completely distributive]] [[algebraic lattices]] (the [[frames of opens]] of [[Alexandroff locales]] ) form a [[reflective subcategory]] of that of all distributive lattices. The reflector is called _[[canonical extension]]_.



[[!redirects distributive lattices]]