
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Theta functions
+--{: .hide}
[[!include theta functions - contents]]
=--
#### Arithmetic geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include arithmetic geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

An _Artin L-function_ $L_\sigma$ ([Artin 23](#Artin23)) is an [[L-function]] associated with a [[number field]] $K$ and induced from the choice of an $n$-dimensional [[Galois representation]], hence a [[linear representation]] 

$$
  \sigma\;\colon\; Gal(L/K) \longrightarrow GL_n(\mathbb{C})
$$

of the [[Galois group]] for some finite [[Galois extension]] $L$ of $K$: it is the product ("[[Euler product]]") over all [[prime ideals]] $\mathfrak{p}$ in the [[ring of integers]] of $K$, of,  essentially, the [[characteristic polynomials]] of the [[Frobenius homomorphism]] $Frob_p$ regarded (see [here](Frobenius+morphism#AsElementsOfGaloisGroup)) as elements of [[Galois group]] 

$$
  L_{K,\sigma} \colon s
  \mapsto
  \underset{\mathfrak{p}}{\prod}
  det
  \left(   
    id - (N (\mathfrak{p}))^{-s}
    \sigma(Frob_{\mathfrak{p}})
  \right)^{-1}
  \,
$$

([e.g. Gelbhart 84, II.C.2](#Gelbhart84), [Snyder 02, def. 2.1.3](#Snyder02)).

> discussion of ramified primes needs to be added

For $\sigma = 1$ the [[trivial representation]] then the Artin L-function reduces to the [[Dedekind zeta function]] (see [below](#RelationToDedekindZeta)). So conversely one may think of Artin L-functions as being Dedekind zeta functions which are "twisted" by a [[Galois representation]]. (Notice that Galois representations are the analog in [[arithmetic geometry]] of [[flat connections]]/[[local systems of coefficients]]).

For $\sigma$ any 1-dimensional [[Galois representation]] (hence the case $n = 1$) then there is a _[[Dirichlet character]]_ $\chi$ such that the Artin L-function $L_\sigma$ is equal to the [[Dirichlet L-function]] $L_\chi$ -- this relation is part of _[[Artin reciprocity]]_.

For $\sigma$ any $n$-dimensional representation for $n \geq 1$ then the [[conjecture]] of _[[Langlands correspondence]]_ is that for each $n$-dimensional [[Galois representation]] $\sigma$ there is an [[automorphic representation]] $\pi$ such that the Artin L-function $L_\sigma$ equals the [[automorphic L-function]] $L_\pi$ (e.g [Gelbhart 84, pages 5-6](#Gelbhart84)).

## Properties

### For irreducible representations -- Artin's conjecture

_Artin's conjecture_ is the statement that for a nontrivial _[[irreducible representation]]_ $\sigma$ the Artin L-function $L_{K,\sigma}$ is not just a [[meromorphic function]] on the complex plane, but in fact an [[entire holomorphic function]].

e.g. ([Ram Murty 94, p. 3](#RamMurty94))

> or rather with at most a  pole at $s = 1$ [Murty-Murty 12, page 29 in chapter 2](#MurtyMurty12)


### For induced representations 
 {#ForInducedRepresentations}

Let $H \hookrightarrow Gal(L/K)$ be [[subgroup]] of the Galois group $G \coloneqq Gal(L/K)$ and write $L^H \hookrightarrow L$ for the subfield of elements fixed by $H$.
Let $\sigma$ be a representation of $H = Gal(L/L^H)$ and write 
$Ind_H^G\sigma$ for the [[induced representation]] of $G$. Then the corresponding Artin L-functions are equal:

$$
  L_{K,{Ind_H^{G}\sigma}} = L_{L^H, \sigma}
  \,.
$$

(e.g. ([Murty-Murty 12, equation (2) in chapter 2](#MurtyMurty12))).

### Relation to the Dedekind zeta function
 {#RelationToDedekindZeta}

For $\sigma = 1$ the [[trivial representation]] then $\sigma(Frob_{\mathfrak{p}}) = id$ identically, and hence in this case the definition of the Artin L-function becomes verbatim that of the [[Dedekind zeta function]] $\zeta_K$:

$$
  L_{L,1} = \zeta_L
  \,.
$$

If $L/K$ is a [[Galois extension]], the by the behaviour of Artin L-functions for induced representation as [above](#ForInducedRepresentations) this is also the Artin L-function of $K$ itself for the [[regular representation]] of $Gal(L/K)$


$$
  \zeta_L
  =
  L_{L,1}
  = 
  L_{K,{Ind_1^{Gal(L/K)}1}}
$$

(e.g. ([Murty-Murty 12, below (2) in chapter 2](#MurtyMurty12)))





### Analogy with Selberg/Ruelle zeta-functions 
 {#AnalogyWithSelbergZeta}

The [[Frobenius morphism]] $Frob_p$ giving an element in the [[Galois group]] means that one may think of it as an element of the [[fundamental group]] of the given [[arithmetic curve]] (see at _[[algebraic fundamental group]]_). There is a direct analogy between Frobenius elements at prime numbers in arithmetic geometry and parallel transport along [[prime geodesics]] in hyperbolic geometry ([Brown 09, p. 6](#Brown09)).

Under this interpretation, a [[Galois connection]] corresponds to a [[flat connection]] ([[local system of coefficients]]) on an arithmetic curve, and its Artin L-function is a product of [[characteristic polynomials]] of the [[monodromies]]/[[holonomies]] of that flat connection.

Now, in [[differential geometry]], given a suitable odd-dimensional [[hyperbolic manifold]] equipped with an actual [[flat bundle]] over it, then associated with it is the _[[Selberg zeta function]]_ and _[[Ruelle zeta function]]_. Both are (by definition in the latter case and by theorems in the former) [[Euler products]] of [[characteristic polynomials]] of [[monodromies]]/[[holonomies]]. See at _[Selberg zeta function -- Analogy with Artin L-function](Selberg+zeta+function#AnalogyWithArtinLFunction)_ and at _[Ruelle zeta function -- Analogy with Artin L-function](Ruelle+zeta+function#AnalogyToTheArtinLFunction)_ for more on this.

See also ([Brown 09, page 6](#Brown09), [Morishita 12, remark 12.7](#Morishita12)).

(The definition also has some similarity to that of the [[Alexander polynomial]], see at _[[arithmetic topology]]_.)


## Related concepts


[[!include zeta-functions and eta-functions and theta-functions and L-functions -- table]]

## References

The original article is

* {#Artin23} [[Emil Artin]],  _Über eine neue Art von L Reihen_. Hamb. Math. Abh. 3. (1923) Reprinted in his collected works, ISBN 0-387-90686-X. English translation in ([Snyder 02, section A](#Snyder02))

Reviews include

* Wikipedia, _[Artin L-function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artin_L-function)_

* {#MurtyMurty12} M. Ram Murty, V. Kumar Murty, _Non-vanishing of L-functions and applications_, Modern Birkhäuser classics 2012 ([chapter 2 pdf](http://www.beck-shop.de/fachbuch/leseprobe/9783034802734_Excerpt_001.pdf))


* {#Snyder02} [[Noah Snyder]], _Artin L-Functions: A Historical Approach_, 2002 ([pdf](http://www.math.columbia.edu/~nsnyder/thesismain.pdf))

and in the context of the [[Langlands program]]

* {#Gelbhart84} [[Stephen Gelbart]], _An elementary introduction to the Langlands program_,  Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 10 (1984), no. 2, 177–219 ([web](http://www.ams.org/journals/bull/1984-10-02/S0273-0979-1984-15237-6/))

Further development includes

* {#RamMurty94} M. Ram Murty, _Selberg's conjectures and Artin -functions_, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 31 (1994), 1-14 ([web](http://www.ams.org/journals/bull/1994-31-01/S0273-0979-1994-00479-3/home.html))

The analogy with the [[Selberg zeta function]] is discussed in

* {#Brown09} Darin Brown, _Lifting properties of prime geodesics_, Rocky Mountain J. Math. Volume 39, Number 2 (2009), 437-454 ([euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.rmjm/1239113439))

* {#Morishita12} [[Masanori Morishita]], section 12.1 of _Knots and Primes: An Introduction to Arithmetic Topology_, 2012 ([web](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=DOnkGOTnI78C&pg=PA156#v=onepage&q&f=false))


The analogies between Alexander polynomial and L-functions and touched upon in 

* Ken-ichi Sugiyama, _The properties of an L-function from a geometric point of view_, 2007 [pdf](http://geoquant2007.mi.ras.ru/sugiyama.pdf); _A topological $\mathrm{L}$ -function for a threefold_, 2004 [pdf](http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~kyodo/kokyuroku/contents/pdf/1376-12.pdf)

[[!redirects Artin L-functions]]