
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Philosophy
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include philosophy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

**Hermann Cohen** (1842-1918) was a German Philosopher of Jewish origin. He was one of the main protagonists of the _Marburg school of Neo-Kantianism_ together with Paul Natorp and Ernst Cassirer.

According to _Hans-Georg Gadamer_ who was PhD-student of Natorp, the principal idea of the Marburg school is the formulation of the _transcendental concepts_ of Kant as methods of the generation of reality through pure thought modeled on the role of continuity and infinitesimals in the mathematical sciences programmatically expressed in ([Cohen 1883](#Cohen83)).

Cohen's views of the role of continuity have strong affinity with Hegelianism and can be viewed as philosophical complement to [[F.W. Lawvere]]'s concept of [[infinitesimal generation]] for [[cohesive toposes]] although the latter explicitly rejected the idealist idea of generation of reality from pure thought.

## Related entries

* [[cohesion]]
* [[synthetic differential geometry]]
* [[infinitesimal]]
* [[William Lawvere]]
* [[Charles Sanders Peirce]]

## Links

* [Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/cohen/)
* [Wikipedia entry (German)](http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hermann_Cohen)
* [Wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hermann_Cohen)

## References

* {#Cohen83}H. Cohen, _Das Prinzip der Infinitesimal-Methode und seine Geschichte_ , Berlin 1883.

* H. Cohen, _Logik der Reinen Erkenntnis_ , Berlin 1902.

* G. Frege, _Rezension von: [Cohen 1883](#Cohen83)_, Z.Phil.Phil.Kr. **87** (1885) pp.324-329, reprinted on pp.99-102 in Frege, _Kleine Schriften_ , Olms Hildesheim 1990.

* H.-G. Gadamer, _Festrede zum 100. Geburtstag von Paul Natorp gehalten am 24.1.1954_ , pp.XI-XVII in Natorp, _Philosophische Systematik_ , Meiner Hamburg 1958. 

* [[F. W. Lawvere]], _Toposes of Laws of Motion_ , Talk Montreal 1997.

category:people