
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[renormalization group flow]] of the [[coupling constants]] ("[[running coupling constants]]") of the three [[gauge field|gauge]] [[forces]] of the [[standard model of particle physics]] come close to all intersecting at a single point at some high energy. This observation has led to the speculation that there ought to be a refinement of the standard model such as [[GUT]]-theories and/or [[supersymmetry]]-extensions such as the [[MSSM]] in which the gauge coupling constants unify exactly at high energy. This idea is called _gauge coupling unification_.

Surveys include [Uzan, section 5.3.1](#Uzan)

From [Ellis-Wells 15, p. 2](#EllisWells15):

> Famously, the [[standard model of particle physics|Standard Model]] (SM) does not unify under that rubric but the [[MSSM|Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model]] (MSSM) does according to many [1–7].  However, neither statement is true.  The SM cannot be ruled out as the IR manifestation of a [[GUT|Grand Unified Theory]] (GUT), nor do the three gauge couplings meet at precisely one point in the MSSM. The key to understanding both claims is that high-scale thresholds are generically expected, which are the multiplets at the high scale that get masses by the same mechanism that breaks the GUT symmetry. High-scale threshold corrections kick the couplings further into exact unification if the underlying theory is gauge-coupling unified.

and further from [Ellis-Wells 17, p. 23 to 26](#EllisWells17):

> Thus, even the Standard Model up to the high scale is compatible with gauge coupling unification from this perspective, although the corrections becomes quite large in that case, and one has to ask whether nature would rather have large corrections at the GUT scale for a SM GUT or very small corrections
for a low-scale SUSY GUT. 

> $[...]$ the  introduction  of  supersymmetry  both  reduces  the  needed  threshold corrections at the high-scale and increases the GUT scale $[...]$.  This  latter  element  is  helpful  since  one generally  requires  that  the  GUT  scale  be  above  about  $10^{15}$ [[GeV]] so that the $X$,$Y$ GUT gauge bosons do not induce too large dimension-six operators that cause the [[proton decay|proton to decay]] faster than current limits allow. 

> Thus, exact gauge coupling unification is viable for intermediate values of supersymmetry breaking, which are also compatible with the Higgs boson mass constraint.

> $[...]$

> One important experimental prediction of minimal supersymmetry, even for superpartners at very high scales,  is the existence of a relatively light [[Higgs boson]].  This has been seen  by  the  LHC.  We  have  shown  in  this  paper  that  even  arbitrary  high  scales  of  super-partners allow the light Higgs boson, due to the required matching of the SM effective theory Higgs self-interaction coupling to gauge couplings in the supersymmetric theory.  

> We have discussed how gauge coupling unification generally only improves in a supersymmetric theory, even at very high scales, with respect to the SM. Thus, we find that PeV scale [23–27] or intermediate scale supersymmetry [3, 5], two ideas that are prevalent in the literature for other reasons involving dark matter and neutrino physics, are compatible with the Higgs boson constraint and gauge coupling unification under the conditions described above.



## Related concepts

* [[GUT]], [[supersymmetry]]

* [[theory of everything]]

* [[string theory FAQ]]

## References

Reviews include (roughly in increasing order of technical detail)


* [[Savas Dimopoulos]], [[Stuart Raby]], [[Frank Wilczek]], _Unification of couplings_, Physics Today, October 1991 [[WilczekGaugeCouplingUnification.pdf:file]]

* Sander Mooij, section 1.3.4 of _Supersymmetric Grand unification_, 2008 ([[MooijGUT.pdf:file]])

* {#Uzan} Jean-Philippe Uzan, section 5.3.1 of _Varying Constants, Gravitation and Cosmology_, Living Reviews in Relativity ([arXiv:1009.5514](https://arxiv.org/abs/1009.5514))

* {#EllisWells15} Sebastian A. R. Ellis, [[James Wells]], _Visualizing gauge unification with high-scale thresholds_, Phys. Rev. D 91, 075016 (2015) ([arXiv:1502.01362](https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.01362))

* {#EllisWells17} Sebastian A. R. Ellis, [[James Wells]], _High-scale Supersymmetry, the Higgs Mass and Gauge Unification_, Phys. Rev. D 96, 055024 (2017) ([arXiv:1706.00013](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.00013))

Original articles include

* {#GeorgiGlashow74} [[Howard Georgi]], [[Sheldon Glashow]], _Unity of All Elementary-Particle Forces_, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 438, 1974 ([doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.32.438](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.32.438))

* P.H. Chankowski, Z. Pluciennik, S. Pokorski, C.E. Vayonakis, _Gauge Coupling Unification in GUT and String Models_ ([arXiv:hep-ph/9506393](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9506393))

* Dumitru M. Ghilencea, Graham G. Ross, _Precision prediction of gauge couplings and the profile of a string theory_ ([arXiv:hep-ph/0102306](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0102306))

