+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Duality
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include duality - contents]]
=--
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A **nuclear object** is a categorical generalization of the concept of a finite-dimensional vector space.

## Definition

A _nuclear object_in a [[symmetric monoidal closed category]] with unit $k$ is an object $A$ such that the canonical morphism $\phi _A:A\otimes A^*\to [ A, A]$ with $A^*:=[A,k]$ is an isomorphism.

## Properties

If $A$ is nuclear then the canonical map to the double dual $\theta _A: A\to A^{**}$ is an isomorphism.

## Examples

* Nuclear objects in the category of complete semilattices are precisely the [[completely distributive lattices]].

* Nuclear objects in the category of pointed sets are precisely the pointed sets with cardinality $\leq 2$.

* Nuclear objects in the category of [[Banach spaces]] with morphisms the bounded maps are the [[nuclear spaces]]. 

(cf. Rowe 1988)



## Related concepts

* [[nucleus of a profunctor]]

* [[completely distributive lattice]]

* [[nuclear space]]

* [[self-dual object]]

* [[dualizable object]]

* [[trace]]

## References

* D. A. Higgs, K. A. Rowe, _Nuclearity in the category of complete semilattices_, JPAA **57** no.1 (1989) pp.67-78.

* K. A. Rowe, _Nuclearity_ , Canad.Math.Bull. **31**  no.2 (1988) pp.227-235. ([pdf](http://cms.math.ca/cmb/v31/cmb1988v31.0227-0235.pdf))

* G. N. Raney, _Tight Galois Connections and Complete Distributivity_ , Trans.Amer.Math.Soc **97** (1960) pp.418-426. ([pdf](http://www.ams.org/journals/tran/1960-097-03/S0002-9947-1960-0120171-3/S0002-9947-1960-0120171-3.pdf))