
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Knot theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include knot theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

The text

* [[Lord Kelvin]],

  _On Vortex Atoms_

  Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Vol. VI, pp. 94-105.

  1867

  ([web](http://zapatopi.net/kelvin/papers/on_vortex_atoms.html))

presented the hypothesis that [[atoms]] ([[elementary particles]]) are fundamentally [[vortices]] in some [[spacetime]]-filling substance (the "aether").

Review and discussion includes

* Samuel Lomonaco, _The modern legacies of Thomson's atomic vortex theory in classical electrodynamics_ [pdf](http://www.csee.umbc.edu/~lomonaco/kelvin/kelvin23.pdf)

As a literal theory of [[physics]] the vortex atom hypothesis was soon rejected. But it made [[Peter Tait]] start thinking about classification of [[knots]], which eventually led to modern [[knot theory]] in [[mathematics]]. Moreover, faint shadows of Kelvin's original idea have been argued to be visible in [[string theory]] -- and the failure of the vortex atom theory has been used to warn of too much hope into string theory.

It is however striking that the modern concept of [[baryogenesis]] via the [[chiral anomaly]] and its sensitivity to [[instantons]] is not too far away from Kelvin's intuition.

To play this out in the most pronounced scenario, consider, for the sake of it, a [[no boundary proposal|Hartle-Hawking no-boundary spacetime]] carrying $N$ [[Yang-Mills instantons]]. Notice that an [[instanton]] is in a precise sense the modern higher dimensional and [[gauge theory|gauge theoretic]] version of what Kelvin knew as a fluid [[vortex]].

Then the non-[[conservation law]] of the [[baryon]] [[conserved current]] due to the [[chiral anomaly]] says precisely the following: the net baryon number in the early universe is an steadily increasing number -- this is the modern mechanism of [[baryogenesis]] -- such that as one approachs the asymptotically late time after the "[[Big Bang]]" this number converges onto the integer $N$, the number of instantons.

Hence while in the modern picture of baryogenesis via [[gauge anomaly]] an [[elementary particle]] is not literally identified with an instanton, nevertheless each instanton induces precisely one net [[baryon]].

(If one doesnt want to consider a [[no boundary proposal|Hartle-Hawking-type]] Euclidean no-boundary spacetime but instead a [[globally hyperbolic spacetime]] then the conclusion still holds, just not relative to vanishing baryon number at the "south pole" of the cosmic 4-spehere, but relative to the net baryon  number at any chosen spatial reference slice. )



category: reference

