
# The Bayesian interpretation of quantum physics
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

[[mathematics|Mathematically]], [[quantum mechanics]], and in particular [[quantum statistical mechanics]], can be viewed as a generalization of [[probability theory]].  The [[Bayesianism|Bayesian]] interpretation of probability can then be generalized to a Bayesian interpretation of quantum mechanics, and thus (in principle) of all [[physics]].


## Formalism

The mathematics is perhaps cleanest using [[JBW-algebras]], that is [[Jordan algebra|Jordan]] [[W*-algebras]].  That is, we have:

* a [[Banach space]] $A$ whose elements are thought of as (bounded, real-valued) [[observables]],
* a [[Banach space]] $A_*$ whose positive norm-$1$ elements are thought of ([[normal state|normal]], [[mixed state|mixed]]) [[states]],
* with $A$ expressed as the [[dual Banach space|dual]] of $A_*$,
* with a commutative (but [[nonassociative algebra|nonassociative]]) multiplication operation on $A$,
* with the nonassociative [[Banach algebra]] $A$ satisfying a couple of technical conditions ([[power-associative algebra|power-associativity]], positivity, and the [[B-identity]]).

If the multiplication on $A$ happens to be [[associative algebra|associative]], then there exists a [[measure space]] $X$ such that $A_*$ is the [[Lebesgue space]] $L^1(X)$ and $A$ is $L^\infty(X)$.  It is always possible to take $X$ to be [[localizable measure space|localizable]], in which case the [[Radon--Nikodym theorem]] applies and we can identify $L^1(X)$ with the space of [[absolutely continuous measures]] on $X$.  At this point, the measure on $X$ is irrelevant except for its specification of [[full set|full]] (or [[null set|null]]) subsets, so we may treat $X$ as simply a [[localizable measurable space]] (which includes this data).  Then the choice of $X$ is actually [[the|essentially unique]].

In this way, the associative case reduces to [[probability theory]].  We have a measurable space $X$, an observable is an [[essentially bounded function]], and a state is a [[probability measure]].  It is true that we only have localizable spaces, but these are the only ones that satisfy the nice theorems (such as Radon--Nikodym, aforementioned) anyway.  (Similarly, the observables are defined only up to [[almost equality]],and the states must be [[absolutely continuous measures]].)

In the general (nonassociative) case, we still think of the elements of $A$ (the observables) as essentially bounded functions, but now on a sort of [[noncommutative geometry|noncommutative]] (or rather nonassociative) space, and we still think of the elements of $A_*$ (the states) as probability measures on that space.  Because $A$ is a Jordan algebra instead of an associative algebra, *all* of its elements may be thought of as observables, but this is more of a convenience than an essential feature.

We might also want to consider generalized (non-normal) states, that is norm-$1$ [[positive operator|positive]] [[linear functionals]] on $A$.  (Every state in $A_*$ may be so interpreted, using the natural map $A_* \to (A_*)^{**} = A^*$).  In the associative case, the [[delta measure]]s (corresponding to points of $X$) belong here; more generally, [[pure states]] live in $A^*$.  (Pure states *can* exist in $A_*$, but only in the simplest cases.)  One may go further and consider [[quasistate]]s, if any exist.

In particular, if $A$ is the space of [[bounded operators|bounded]] [[self-adjoint operators]] on some [[Hilbert space]] $H$, then $A_*$ is the space of [[trace-class operator|trace-class]] self-adjoint on $H$.  Then a (normal) state is a trace-class [[density matrix]], while a generalized state in $A^*$ is an arbitrary density matrix.  The pure states (of the form ${|\psi\rangle\langle\psi|}$ for $\psi$ a unit vector in $H$) always belong to $A^*$ but only belong to $A_*$ when the dimension of $H$ is finite.


## Interpretation

A state (a unit vector in $A_*$) represents a _state of knowledge_ about the world.  Just as a Bayesian probability measure is not an objective feature of the world (the territory) but rather an expression what a rational observer might know about the world (a map), so a quantum state in $A_*$ is also a map, not the territory.  There is (except when $A$ is associative) *no* possible complete specification of the actual values of all observables, only a probabilistic specification of what one might know about them.

In the [[Schroedinger picture]] (assuming a notion of [[time]]), states evolve deterministically, unitarily, and with conservation of [[entropy]].  (Or in the [[Heisenberg picture]], they don\'t evolve at all.)  But a state may change otherwise, if one\'s knowledge changes.  If this is an increase in knowledge as a result of a [[measurement]], then this change in the state may be called the 'collapse of the wavefunction'.  But this collapse takes place in the map, not the territory; it is not a physical process.


## History

People have implied (for example at the beginning of [Caves, Fuchs, & Schack, 2001](#CFS2001)) that this is what [[Niels Bohr]] meant all along when he put forth the [[Copenhagen interpretation]] (for more on this suggestion see also at _[[Bohr topos]]_), and people have implied (in the first paper at [Fuchs, ongoing](#Fuchs)) that it is what [[Albert Einstein]] was groping towards when he attacked Bohr, and still others ([[Ray Streater]] as cited in [Wikimedia Foundation, ongoing](#Wikimedia)) have implied that it is what [[John von Neumann]] was doing when he eschewed interpretation for mathematical axioms.  Any time that somebody has described a quantum state as containing information, or being given by an experimenter\'s knowledge, or being different for one observer than for another, the Bayesian interpretation is implicit.  Arguably, it is implicit in any statement that the wavefunction describes probabilities, if [[probability]] is treated as Bayesian.  However, the *explicit* exposition of this interpretation seems to have come rather late.

The earliest linking of Bayesianism to quantum states as states of knowledge, as far as I have found, is Usenet discussion in 1994 ([Baez et al, 2003](#Baez2003)).  [[John Baez]] was promoting similar ideas the previous year ([Baez, 1993](#Baez1993)), but here he does not yet say 'Bayes'.  The idea of a 'Bayesian interpretation' came to prominence in 2001, drawing out of work on [[quantum information theory]] ([Caves, Fuchs, & Schack, 2001](#CFS2001)).  Further work has been done principally by [[Christopher Fuchs]] ([Fuchs, ongoing](#Fuchs)).  Fuchs\'s approach to Bayesianism has become increasingly subjectivist, making the links to [[quantum information theory]] less fundamental.  (In contrast, the description above is primarily in terms of the objectivist school of Bayesianism.)


## References

* [[John Baez]] (1993). This Week's Finds in Mathematical Physics (Week 27). [Web](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/week27.html).
  {#Baez1993}

* John Baez et al (2003). Bayesian Probability Theory and Quantum Mechanics. Collection of Usenet posts from 1994, with commentary. [Web](http://www.math.ucr.edu/home/baez/bayes.html)
  {#Baez2003}

* Carlton Caves, [[Christopher Fuchs]], Ruediger Schack (2001). Unknown Quantum States: The Quantum de Finetti Representation. [arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0104088).
  {#CFS2001}

* [[Christopher Fuchs]] (ongoing). Quantum Dreams Page. Collection of preprints, epistles, and lecture notes. [web](http://www.perimeterinstitute.ca/personal/cfuchs/).
  {#Fuchs}

* Wikimedia Foundation (ongoing). Quantum Bayesianism. [English Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_Bayesianism).
  {#Wikimedia}


[[!redirects Bayesian interpretation of quantum mechanics]]
[[!redirects Bayesian interpretations of quantum mechanics]]
[[!redirects Bayesian interpretation of quantum physics]]
[[!redirects Bayesian interpretations of quantum physics]]
[[!redirects Bayesian interpretation of physics]]
[[!redirects Bayesian interpretations of physics]]
