+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
#### $\infty$-Lie theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-Lie theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
 {:toc}

## Idea

Where an ordinary [[manifold]] is a [[space]] locally modeled on [[Cartesian spaces]], an _orbifold_ is, more generally, a [[space]] that is locally modeled on [[Lie groupoid|smooth]] [[action groupoids]] (="stack quotients") of a [[finite group]] [[action|acting]] on a [[Cartesian space]].

This turns out to be equivalent ([Moerdijk](#Moerdijk), [Moerdijk-Pronk](#MoerdijkPronk)) to saying that an orbifold is a [[proper groupoid|proper]] [[étale groupoid|étale]] [[Lie groupoid]]. ([[Morita equivalence|Morita equivalent]] Lie groupoids correspond to the same orbifolds.)

The word _orbifold_ was invented in ([Thurston 1992](#Thurston)), while the original name was _$V$-manifold_ ([Satake](#Satake)), and was taken in a more restrictive sense, assuming that the actions of finite groups on the charts are always effective. Nowdays we call such orbifolds _effective_ and those which are global quotients by a finite group _global quotient orbifolds_.  

There is also a notion of finite stabilizers in [[algebraic geometry]]. A singular variety is called an (algebraic) _orbifold_ if it has only so-called _orbifold singularities_.

## Definition

An orbifold is a stack presented by an [[orbifold groupoid]].

## Properties

### General

* One can consider a [[bicategory]] of proper étale Lie groupoids and the orbifolds will be the objects of certain bicategorical [[localization]] of this bicategory (a result of [Moerdijk and Pronk](#MoerdijkPronk)). 


* Equivalently, every orbifold is globally a quotient of a smooth manifold by an [[action]] of finite-dimensional [[Lie group]] with finite [[stabilizer subgroup|stabilizers]] in each point. (eg ([Adem-Leida-Ruan 2007](#ALR07)), Corollary 1.24)


### Global quotient orbifolds
 {#GlobalQuotientOrbifolds}

In ([ALR 07, theorem 1.23](#ALR07)) is asserted that every effective orbifold $X$ (paracompact, Hausdorff) is isomorphic to a global quotient orbifold, specifically to a global quotient of $O(n)$ (where $n$ is the dimension of $X$) acting on the [[frame bundle]] of $X$ (which is a manifold).

### (Co)homology

It has been noticed that the topological invariants of the underlying topological space of an orbifold as a topological space with an orbifold structure are not appropriate, but have to be corrected leading to [[orbifold Euler characteristics]], orbifold cohomology etc. One of the constructions which is useful in this respect is the inertia orbifold (the inertia stack of the original orbifold) which gives rise to "twisted sectors" in Hilbert space of a quantum field theory on the orbifold, and also to twisted sectors in the appropriate cohomology spaces. A further generalization gives multitwisted sectors. 




## Examples

* Some basic building blocks of orbifolds:

  The quotient of a  [[ball]] by a [[discrete group|discrete]] [[subgroup]] of the [[special orthogonal group]] of rotations. Is an orbifold, and orbifolds may be obtained by cutting out balls from ordinary [[smooth manifolds]] and gluing in these orbifold quotients.

* The [[moduli stack of elliptic curves]] over the [[complex numbers]] is an orbifold, being the [[homotopy quotient]] of the [[upper half plane]] by the [[special linear group]] acting by [[Möbius transformations]].

* For $\mathcal{G}$ any orbifold, then the [[mapping space]] $\mathcal{G}^{\Pi(S^1)} = \mathcal{G}^{B\mathbb{Z}}$ is again an orbifold, called the [[inertia orbifold]].


## Related concepts

* [[motivation for higher differential geometry]]

* [[orbifold Euler characteristic]]

Orbifolds are in [[differential geometry]] what [[Deligne-Mumford stacks]] are in [[algebraic geometry]]. See also at _[[geometric invariant theory]]_ and _[[GIT-stable point]]_.

If the finiteness condition is dropped one also speaks of _[[orbispaces]] and generally of [[stacks]].

Orbifolds may be regarded as a kind of _[[stratified spaces]]_.

See also 

* [[étale groupoid]]

* [[stable map]]

* [[orbifold cohomology]], [[Gromov-Witten theory]]

Orbifolds in [[string theory]]:

* [[fractional D-brane]]

* [[ADE singularity]]

* [[orientifold]]

## References

### General

Original sources on orbifolds include

* I. Satake, _On a generalisation of the notion of manifold_, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 42 (1956), 359–363.
 {#Satake}

* I. Satake, _The Gauss–Bonnet theorem for $V$-manifolds_, J. Math. Soc. Japan 9 (1957), 464–492.

* [[William Thurston]], _Three-dimensional geometry and topology,_ preliminary draft, University of Minnesota, Minnesota, (1992)
 {#Thurston} which in completed and revised form is available as his book: _The Geometry and Topology of Three-Manifolds;_ in particular the orbifold discussion is in [chapter 13](http://library.msri.org/books/gt3m/PDF/13.pdf).

Discussion of orbifold as [[Lie groupoids]]/[[differentiable stacks]] is in


* {#Moerdijk} [[Ieke Moerdijk]], _Orbifolds as Groupoids: an Introduction_ ([arXiv:math.DG/0203100](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.DG/0203100))
 

* {#MoerdijkPronk} [[Ieke Moerdijk]], [[Dorette Pronk]], _Orbifolds, sheaves and groupoids_, K-theory 12 3-21 (1997) ([pdf](http://www.math.colostate.edu/~renzo/teaching/Orbifolds/pronk.pdf))
  

* [[Eugene Lerman]], _Orbifolds as stacks?_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/0806.4160))

The [[mapping stacks]] of orbifolds are discussed in

* W. Chen, _On a notion of maps between orbifolds_, I. Function spaces, Commun. Contemp. Math. 8 (2006), no. 5, 569–620.

Orbifolds often appear as [[moduli spaces]] in differential geometric setting:

* [[Dietmar Salamon]], [[Joel Robbin|Joel W. Robbin]], A construction of the Deligne--Mumford orbifold, J. Eur. Math. Society, ISSN 1435-9855, Vol. 8, Nº 4, 2006, 611-699 ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0407090))

The generalization of orbifolds to _weighted [[branched manifolds]]_ is discussed in

* [[Dusa McDuff]], _Groupoids, branched manifolds and multisections_, J. Symplectic Geom. Volume 4, Number 3 (2006), 259-315 ([project euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.jsg/1180135649)).

A reference dealing with the [[string topology]] of orbifolds is

* {#ALR07} A. Adem, J. Leida and Y. Ruan, _Orbifolds and Stringy Topology_, Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics **171** (2007) ([pdf](http://www.math.colostate.edu/~renzo/teaching/Orbifolds/Ruan.pdf))

See also

* Wikipedia,  _[Orbifolds](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orbifold)_ 

(which is mainly tailored toward Thurston's approach). 

### Orbifold cobordism

Orbifold [[cobordisms]] are discussed in 

* K. S. Druschel, _Oriented Orbifold Cobordism_, Pacific J. Math., 164(2) (1994), 299-319.

* K. S. Druschel, _The Cobordism of Oriented Three Dimensional Orbifolds_, Pacific J. Math., bf 193(1) (2000), 45-55.

* Andres Angel, _Orbifold cobordism_ ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/aangel79/Orbifold%20cobordism.pdf)) 

See also at _[[orbifold cobordism]]_.

### In string theory

Orbifolds as [[target spaces]] for a [[string]] [[sigma-model]] were first considered in 

* [[Lance Dixon]], [[Jeffrey Harvey]], [[Cumrun Vafa]], [[Edward Witten]], _Strings on orbifolds, I, II_, Nucl.Phys. B261(1985), 678, B274(1986), 285.

and then further developed notably in 

* [[Eric Zaslow]], _Topological orbifold models and quantum cohomology rings_, Comm. Math. Phys. 156 (1993), no. 2, 301–331.

For [[topological strings]] the [[path integral as a pull-push transform]] for target orbifolds -- in analogy to what [[Gromov-Witten theory]] is for [[Deligne-Mumford stacks]] -- has first been considered in 

* {#ChenRuan01} Weimin Chen, [[Yongbin Ruan]], _Orbifold Gromov-Witten Theory_, in _Orbifolds in mathematics and physics_ (Madison, WI, 2001), 25–85, Contemp. Math., 310, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2002 ([arXiv:math/0103156](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0103156))
 

A review with further pointers is in 

* {#Abramovich05} [[Dan Abramovich]], _Lectures on Gromov-Witten invariants of orbifolds_ ([arXiv:math/0512372](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0512372))
 

category: Lie theory


[[!redirects orbifolds]]