
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topos Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
+ automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea
The **bagdomain topos construction** is the topos analogue of the powerdomain construction in domain-theoretic database theory. Roughly speaking, an object $X$ is replaced by an object $X'$ such that points of $X'$ correspond to sets (='bags') of points of $X$.

## Related entries

* [[symmetric topos]]

* [[Artin gluing]]


## References

* [[Marta Bunge]], [[Jonathon Funk]], _Spreads and the Symmetric Topos_ , JPAA **113** (1996) pp.1-38.

* [[Marta Bunge]], [[Jonathon Funk]], _Spreads and the Symmetric Topos II_ , JPAA **130** (1998) pp.49-84.

* [[Marta Bunge]], [[Jonathon Funk]], _Singular Coverings of Toposes_ , Springer LNM **1890** Heidelberg 2006.

* M. Jibladze, _Lower Bagdomain as a Glueing_ , Proc. A. Razmadze Math. Inst. **118** (1998) pp.33-41. ([pdf](http://www.rmi.ge/~jib/baglue.pdf))

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _Partial Products, Bagdomains and Hyperlocal Toposes_ , pp.315-339 in Fourman, Johnstone, Pitts (eds.), _Applications of Categories in Computer Science - Proceedings of the LMS Symposium Durham 1991_ , Cambridge UP 1992.

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _Variations on the Bagdomain Theme_ , Theo. Comp. Sci. **136** (1994) pp.3-20.

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _Sketches of an Elephant I_ , Oxford UP 2002.  (sec. B4.4, pp.448-456) {#elephant}


* [[Steve Vickers]], _Geometric Theories and Databases_ , pp.288-314 in Fourman, Johnstone, Pitts (eds.), _Applications of Categories in Computer Science - Proceedings of the LMS Symposium Durham 1991_ , Cambridge UP 1992. ([preprint](http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~sjv/GeoTh+DBs.pdf))