
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topos Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
+ automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea

The **symmetric topos** $M(\mathcal{E})$ of a Grothendieck topos $\mathcal{E}$ is the topos analogue of the [[symmetric algebra]] construction. Its importance stems from the property that for a topos $\mathcal{E}$ the symmetric topos $M(\mathcal{E})$ classifies [[Lawvere distribution|topos distributions]] on $\mathcal{E}$.

## Definition


## Properties


## Example




## Related entries

* [[Lawvere distribution]]

* [[bagdomain topos]]

* [[cosheaf]]

* [[locally connected geometric morphism]]

* [[totally connected geometric morphism]]

* [[lax-idempotent 2-monad]]

## References

* [[Marta Bunge]], _Cosheaves and Distributions on Toposes_ , Alg. Univ. **34** (1995) pp.469-484.

* [[Marta Bunge]], [[Aurelio Carboni]], _The Symmetric Topos_  ,  JPAA **105** (1995) pp.233-249.

* [[Marta Bunge]], [[Jonathon Funk]], _Spreads and the Symmetric Topos_ , JPAA **113** (1996) pp.1-38.

* [[Marta Bunge]], [[Jonathon Funk]], _Spreads and the Symmetric Topos II_ , JPAA **130** (1998) pp.49-84.

* {#BF99} [[Marta Bunge]], [[Jonathon Funk]], _On a bicomma object condition for KZ-doctrines_ , JPAA **143** (1999) pp.69-105.

* [[Marta Bunge]], [[Jonathon Funk]], _Singular Coverings of Toposes_ , Springer LNM **1890** Heidelberg 2006.

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _Sketches of an Elephant I_ , Oxford UP 2002.  (sec. B4.5, pp.456-467) {#elephant}

* [[Andrew Pitts|Andrew M. Pitts]], _On product and change of base for toposes_ , Cah. Top. Géom. Diff. Cat. **XXVI** no.1 (1985) pp.43-61.

* [[Steve Vickers]], _Cosheaves and Connectedness in Formal Topology_ , Ann. Pure Appl. Logic **163** no.2 (2012) pp.157-174. ([preprint](www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~sjv/ConnFT.pdf))
