> To this day, the theorem of Pythagoras remains the most important single theorem in the whole of mathematics. -- Jacob Bronowski, _The Ascent of Man_, page 160. 

# Contents 
* table of contents 
{: toc} 

## Introduction and History 

In Euclidean geometry, the Pythagorean theorem expresses a necessary and sufficient condition on the lengths of the three sides of a triangle in order for it to be a right triangle. In the popular mind it is associated with the equation 

$$a^2 + b^2 = c^2,$$ 

where $c$ denotes the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle, and $a, b$ are the lengths of the other two sides. 

It was apparently known (in some form or other) by a number of ancient civilizations (Mesopotamia, circa 1800 BCE[^1]; China, Zhou Dynasty, circa 1000 BCE[^2]), and appears in Euclid's Elements as a capstone result of Book 1 (as Proposition 47, and Proposition 48 for the converse). [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pythagorean_theorem#Pythagorean_triples) mentions, but without a citation, that certain megalithic monuments in Northern Europe indicate that [[Pythagorean triples]] were known even before the invention of writing systems. 

[^1]: See [Maor](#Maor), chapter 1. 
[^2]: See [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zhou_Bi_Suan_Jing), which exhibits an apparent proof based on the famous 'pinwheel' configuration. 

While it was traditional among ancient historians to credit Pythagoras with the first recorded proof (at least the first from Hellenic civilization), there is cause to believe that this (semi-legendary) individual had little to do personally with such a proof or even with mathematics generally within his school -- without however there being doubt that this result and other mathematical ideas were vigorously discussed and developed by the Pythagoreans. 

## Proof 

There are apparently hundreds of proofs. It should be noted that the Pythagorean theorem is a theorem of Euclidean geometry and depends on Euclid's parallel postulate, particularly the consequence that the sum of the interior angles of a triangle is invariably $180^\circ$. 

One proof[^3] proceeds by constructing, given a right triangle with side lengths $a, b$ and hypotenuse length $c$, the unique line incident to the vertex at the right angle that meets the hypotenuse in a right angle. (N.B.: this construction is specific to Euclidean geometry.) This bisects the hypotenuse into two line segments, of length $c_1, c_2$ say with $c_1 + c_2 = c$. (A picture is given [here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pythagorean_theorem#Proof_using_similar_triangles).) Moreover the given right triangle is thereby bisected into two right triangles, and due to the fact that the sum of the interior angles is always $180^\circ$, it may be seen that the two right triangles are similar (i.e., in proportion) to the given right triangle. Therefore, if one has side lengths $h, c_1$ and hypotenuse $a$ say, and the other has side lengths $h, c_2$ and hypotenuse $b$, we may derive proportionality equations 

$$c_1/a = a/c, \qquad c_2/b = b/c,$$ 

from which we may derive $a^2 + b^2 = c_1 c + c_2 c = (c_1 + c_2)c = c^2$. 

[^3]: The proof which appears in Book 1 of the Elements looks somewhat more elaborate, but the proof based on similar triangles perhaps had to await the development of a theory of proportion, set out in Book 5. 

## Modern points of view 

(...) 

## References 

* Eli Maor, The Pythagorean Theorem: A 4000-year History, Princeton University Press, 2007. 
 {#Maor} 