
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Gravity
+--{: .hide}
[[!include gravity contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[phenomenology]] of [[cosmology]], the _Starobinsky model_ of [[cosmic inflation]] takes into account -- and takes as the very source of the [[inflaton]] field -- [[higher curvature corrections]] to the [[Einstein-Hilbert action]] of [[gravity]], notably the term $R^2$ (square of the [[Ricci curvature]]).

Models of this type were strongly favored by the experimental results ([PlanckCollaboration 13](#PlanckCollaboration13)), see ([Ellis 13](#Ellis13), [Ketov 13](#Ketov13) for brief survey and see[Kehagias-Dizgah-Riotto 13](#KehagiasDizgahRiotto13) for more details).

Being concerned with pure [[gravity]] the model lends itself to embedding into [[supergravity]] (e.g. [FKR 13](#FKR13)). Such embedding seems to improve the model further (highlighted e.g. in [Ellis 13](#Ellis13)), for instance by shrinking the necessary initial homogeneous patch from $\sim 10^3$ down to just 50 [[Planck length]]s, and by subsuming a natural mechanism for [[supersymmetry breaking]] ([Ferrar-Kehagias 14](#FerrarKehagias14), [DFKRU 14](#DFKRU14)).

## References

The original articles are

* [[Aleksei Starobinsky]], Phys. Lett. B 91, 99 (1980); 

* [[Viatcheslav Mukhanov]] and G. V. Chibisov, JETP Lett. 33, 532 (1981) [Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 33, 549 (1981)]; 

* [[Aleksei Starobinsky]], Sov. Astron. Lett. 9, 302 (1983).

The experimental data supporting the model is due to 

* {#PlanckCollaboration13} _Planck 2013 results. XXII. Constraints on inflation_ ([arXiv:1303.5082](http://arxiv.org/abs/1303.5082))


Reviews and expositon includes

* {#KehagiasDizgahRiotto13} Alex Kehagias, Azadeh Moradinezhad Dizgah, Antonio Riotto, _Comments on the Starobinsky Model of Inflation and its Descendants_, Phys. Rev. D 89, 043527 (2014) ([arXiv:1312.1155](http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.1155))


* {#Ketov13} [[Sergei Ketov]], _PLANCK mission, Starobinsky inflation and its realization in old-minimal supergravity_, talk at _Kavli IPMU Workshop: SUSY Model Building and Phenomenology_, 2-4 December 2013 ([pdf](http://indico.ipmu.jp/indico/getFile.py/access?contribId=16&sessionId=7&resId=0&materialId=slides&confId=28))

* {#Ellis13} [[John Ellis]], _Planck-Compatible Inflationary Models_, talk 2013 ([pptx](londoncosmology.files.wordpress.com/2013/09/lcdm.pptx))

Discussion of embedding of Starobinsky inflation in [[supergravity]] includes

* [[Sergei Ketov]], _On the supersymmetrization of inflation in f (R)
gravity_, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2013, 123B04 ([pdf](http://ptep.oxfordjournals.org/content/2013/12/123B04.full.pdf))

* {#FKR13} F. Farakos, A. Kehagias, A. Riotto, _On the Starobinsky Model of Inflation from Supergravity_ ([arXiv:1307.1137](http://arxiv.org/abs/1307.1137))

* Sergio Ferrara, Alex Kehagias, Antonio Riotto, _The Imaginary Starobinsky Model and Higher Curvature Corrections_ ([arXiv:1405.2353](http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.2353))

* {#FerrarKehagias14} Sergio Ferrara, Alex Kehagias, _Higher Curvature Supergravity, Supersymmetry Breaking and Inflation_ ([arXiv:org](http://arxiv.org/abs/1407.5187))

* {#DFKRU14} I. Dalianis, F. Farakos, A. Kehagias, A. Riotto, R. von Unge, _Supersymmetry Breaking and Inflation from Higher Curvature Supergravity_ ([arXiv:1409.8299](http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.8299))


[[!redirects Starobinsky inflation]]