[[!redirects distributivity of colimits over limits]]
[[!redirects distributivity of products over colimits]]
[[!redirects precontinuous category]]
[[!redirects precontinuous categories]]
[[!redirects algebraically exact category]]
[[!redirects algebraically exact categories]]

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Limits and colimits
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-limits - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea
 {#Idea}

Given [[small categories]] $I$ and $K$, for any [[diagram]] $D\colon I\times K\to C$ in a [[category]] $C$ that admits all necessary [[limits]] and [[colimits]] we have a [[morphism]]
$$f\colon colim_K lim_I D \to lim_I colim_K D$$
that [[factors]] as a [[composition]]
$$h\circ g\colon colim_K lim_I D \to colim_{K^I} lim_I D' \to lim_I colim_K D.$$
Here $D'\colon I\times K^I\to I\times K\to C$ is obtained from $D$ by [[precomposition]].

Using this setup, we now observe that
$I$-[[limits]] [[commute]] with $K$-[[colimits]] if and only if $f$ is an [[isomorphism]] for any $D$.

We say that
$I$-limits _distribute_ over $K$-colimits if $h$ is an isomorphism for any $D$.

The above definition can be generalized in the obvious
way to the case when the category $K\colon I\to Cat$ is allowed to vary
with respect to $I$.
Equivalently, one can replace $K$ with a [[Grothendieck fibration]] over $I$.
If we set $K$ to the [[constant functor]], we recover the above definition.

## Relation to commutativity of limits and colimits

Observe that distributivity is asymmetric with respect to limits and colimits.
In some cases, however, it is equivalent to commutativity.

Indeed, distributivity coincides with commutativity if and only if $g$ is an isomorphism, i.e., the diagonal map $K\to K^I$ is cofinal.

Thus finite limits distribute over filtered colimits if and only if finite limits commute with filtered colimits.
The same is true for finite products and sifted colimits.

## Abstract formulation

(See Section 6 in [ABLR](#ABLR).)

Given a [[sound doctrine]] $D$ of limits,
we have the associated notions of $D$-limits,
$D$-filtered colimits,
and
$D$-filtered cocompletion $D-Ind(C)$ of a category $C$
together with the associated colimit functor $colim\colon D-Ind(C)\to C$.

We say that some class of limits _distributes over $D$-filtered colimits_ if the functor colim preserves these limits.

### Filtered colimits

If $D$ is the doctrine of finite limits,
then $D$-filtered colimits are precisely filtered colimits
and the $D$-filtered cocompletion of $C$ is $Ind(C)$,
the category of [[Ind-objects]] in $C$.

According to Definition 5.11 in [ALR](#ALR),
a category is _precontinuous_
if it admits small limits and filtered colimits,
and small limits distribute over filtered colimits,
i.e., the functor $colim: Ind(C)\to C$ is continuous.

In particular, any [[locally finitely presentable category]], equivalently the category of algebras
over some finitary [[essentially algebraic theory]],
is precontinuous.
See Theorem 5.13 and Lemma 5.14 in [ALR](#ALR).

In fact, as shown in [ALR](#ALR), precontinuous categories with continuous functors that preserve filtered colimits
form the accessible [[equational hull]] of the bicategory
of [[locally finitely presentable categories]] and continuous functors
that preserve filtered colimits.

### Sifted colimits

If $D$ is the doctrine of finite products,
then $D$-filtered colimits are precisely [[sifted colimits]]
and the $D$-filtered cocompletion of $C$ is $Sind(C)$,
the [[nonabelian derived category]] of $C$.

According to Definition 4.5 in [ALRalg](#ALRalg),
a category is _algebraically exact_
if it admits small limits and sifted colimits,
and small limits distribute over sifted colimits,
i.e., the functor $colim: Sind(C)\to C$ is continuous.
In particular (Example 5.3 in [ALRalg](#ALRalg)),
any [[variety of algebras]]
is an algebraically exact category.

In fact, as shown in [ALRalg](#ALRalg), algebraically exact
categories with continuous functors that preserve sifted colimits
form the accessible [[equational hull]] of the bicategory
of [[varieties of algebras]] and continuous functors
that preserve sifted colimits.

## In sets

The category  [[Set]] of sets is a [[variety of algebras]],
hence small limits distribute over sifted colimits.
Additionally, according to Example 3.20 in [ARV](#ARV),
[[finite products]] distribute over small [[colimits]].

## Related entries

* [[commutativity of limits and colimits]]

## References

* {#ARV} [[Jiří Adámek]], [[Jiří Rosický]], [[Enrico Vitale]], _Algebraic theories.  A categorical introduction to general algebra_ CUP 2011.

* {#ALR} [[Jiří Adámek]], [[William Lawvere]], [[Jiří Rosický]], [_Continuous Categories Revisited_](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/11/11/11-11abs.html) TAC 11, 2003.
* {#ALRalg} [[Jiří Adámek]], [[William Lawvere]], [[Jiří Rosický]], [_How algebraic is algebra_](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/8/n9/8-09abs.html) TAC 8, 2001.

* {#ABLR} [[Jiří Adámek]], [[Francis Borceux]], [[Stephen Lack]], [[Jiří Rosický]], [_A classification of accessible categories_](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022404902001263) JPAA 175, 2002.
