
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context###
#### Topology
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea 

A [[topological space]] is __connected__ if it can not be split up into two independent parts.  

Every topological space may be decomposed into disjoint maximal connected [[subspaces]], called its __[[connected components]]__.  The underlying set of a topological space is the [[disjoint union]] of the underlying sets of its connected components, but the space itself is not necessarily the [[coproduct]] of its connected components in the category of spaces.

One often studies topological ideas first for connected spaces and then generalises to general spaces.  This is especially true if one is studying such [[nice topological space]]s that every space *is* a coproduct of connected components (such as for example _locally connected spaces_; see below). 


## Definitions 

### Elementary definition

+-- {: .num_defn #ConnectedSpace}
###### Definition
**(connected topological space)**

A [[topological space]] $(X, \tau)$ is _connected_ if the following equivalent conditions hold:

1. For all pairs of topological spaces $(X_1, \tau_1), (X_2, \tau_2)$ such that $(X, \tau)$ is [[homeomorphism|homeomorphic]] to their [[disjoint union space]]

   $$
     (X,\tau) \simeq (X_1,\tau_1) \sqcup (X_2,\tau_2)
   $$

   then exactly one of the two spaces is the [[empty space]].

1. For all pairs of [[open subsets]] $U_1, U_2 \subset X$ if 

   $$
     U_1 \cup U_2 = X \phantom{A}\text{and} \phantom{A} U_1 \cap U_2 = \emptyset
   $$

   then exactly one of the two subsets is the [[empty set]]


1. if a [[subset]] $CO \subseteq X$ is [[clopen set|clopen]] (both closed and open), then $ CO = X$ if and only if $CO$ is [[inhabited set|inhabited]].

=--

+-- {: .num_remark #ConnectedEmptySpace}
###### Remark

According to def. \ref{ConnectedSpace} the [[empty topological space]] is not regarded as connected. Some authors do want the empty space to count as a connected space. This means to change in the first item of def. \ref{ConnectedSpace} the "exactly one" to "at least one" and in the second item "if and only if" to "if".

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The conditions in def. \ref{ConnectedSpace} are indeed equivalent.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

First consider the equivalence of the first two statements:

Suppose that in every disjoint union decomposition of $(X,\tau)$ then exactly one summand is empty. Now consider two disjoint open subsets $U_1, U_2 \subset X$ whose union is $X$ and whose intersection is empty. We need to show that exactly one of the two subsets is empty.

Write $(U_1, \tau_{1})$ and $(U_2, \tau_2)$ for the corresponding [[topological subspaces]]. Then observe that from the definition of [[subspace topology]] and the [[disjoint union space]] we have a [[homeomorphism]]

$$
  X \simeq (U_1, \tau_1) \sqcup (U_2, \tau_2)
  \,.
$$ 

Hence by assumption exactly one of the two summand spaces is the [[empty space]] and hence the underlying set is the empty set.

Conversely, suppose that for every pair of open subsets $U_1, U_2 \subset U$ with $U_1 \cup U_2 = X$ and $U_1 \cap U_2 = \emptyset$ then exactly one of the two is empty. Now consider a homeomorphism of the form $(X,\tau) \simeq (X_1, \tau_1 \sqcup (X_2,\tau_29$. By the nature of the [[disjoint union space]] this means that $X_1, X_2 \subset X$ are disjoint open subsets of $X$ which cover $X$. So by asumption precisely one of the two subsets is the empty set and hence precisely one of the two topological spaces is the empty space.

Now regarding the equivalence to the third statement:

If a subset $CO \subset X$ is both closed and open, this means equivalently that it is open and that its [[complement]] $X \setminus CO$ is also open, hence equivalently that there are two open subsets $CO, X \backslash CO \subset X$ whose union is $X$ and whose intersection is empty. This way the third condition is equivalent to the second.

=--


### Category-theoretic definition

In the language of [[category theory]] def. \ref{ConnectedSpace} may be rephrased as follows:

Write [[Top]] for the [[category]] of all [[topological space]]. 

Then a topological space $X$ is connected precisely if the [[representable functor]]

$$ 
  hom(X, -) \;\colon\; Top \longrightarrow Set 
$$

preserves [[coproducts]]. 


It is equivalent to just require that it preserves binary coproducts (a detailed proof in a more general setting is given at _[[connected object]]_ in [this proposition](connected+object#RespectForBinaryCoproductsIsSufficient). In that case, notice that we always have a map
$$ hom(X,Y) + hom(X,Z) \to hom(X,Y + Z) ,$$
so $X$ is connected if this is always a [[bijection]]. This definition generalises to the notion of [[connected object]] in an [[extensive category]].

The variant of the definition according to remark \ref{ConnectedEmptySpace}, which regards the empty space means in terms of category theoretic languag that one
requires only that the maps
$$ hom(X,Y) + hom(X,Z) \to hom(X,Y + Z) $$
be [[surjections]].  

However, many results come out more cleanly by disqualifying the empty space (much as one disqualifies $1$ when one defines the notion of [[prime number]]).  See also the discussion at [[empty space]] and [[too simple to be simple]].


## Basic results {#basic}

+-- {: .num_remark #1} 
###### Result
The [[regular monomorphism|regular]] [[image]] of a connected space $X$ under a continuous map $f: X \to Y$ (i.e., the set-theoretic image with the subspace topology inherited from $Y$) is connected. Or, what is essentially the same: if $X$ is connected and $f: X \to Y$ is [[epimorphism|epic]], then $Y$ is connected. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_remark #2} 
###### Result
[[pushout|Wide pushout]]s of connected spaces are connected. (This would of course be false if the empty space were considered to be connected.) This follows from the hom-functor definition of connectedness, plus the fact that coproducts in $Set$ commute with [[wide pullback]]s. More memorably: [[connected limit|connected colimits]] of connected spaces are connected. 
=--

+-- {: .num_remark #5} 
###### Result
If $S \subseteq X$ is a connected subspace and $S \subseteq T \subseteq \overline{S}$ (i.e. if $T$ is between $S$ and its closure), then $T$ is connected. Or, what is essentially the same: if $T$ has a [[dense subspace|dense]] connected subspace $S$, then $T$ is connected. 
=--

+-- {: .num_remark #3} 
###### Result
An arbitrary [[product]] of connected spaces is connected. (This relies on some special features of $Top$. Discussion of this point can be found at [connected](/nlab/show/connected+object#prod) [object](/nlab/show/connected+object#prod2).)
=--

+-- {: .num_remark #4} 
###### Result
The interval $[0, 1]$, as a subspace of $\mathbb{R}$, is connected. (This is the topological underpinning of the [[intermediate value theorem]].)
=--


## Exotic examples 

The [basic results](basic) above give a plethora of ways to construct connected spaces. More exotic examples are sometimes useful, especially for constructing counterexamples. 

+-- {: .num_example} 
###### Example 
The following, due to [Bing](#Bing), is a countable connected [[Hausdorff space]]. Let $Q = \{(x, y) \in \mathbb{Q} \times \mathbb{Q}: y \geq 0\}$, topologized by defining a basis of neighborhoods $N_{\epsilon, a, b}$ for each point $(a, b) \in Q$ and $\epsilon \gt 0$: 

$$N_{a, b} \coloneqq \{(a, b)\} \cup \{(s, 0) \in Q: {|a + b/\theta - s|} \lt \epsilon\} \cup \{(s, 0) \in Q: {|a - b/\theta - s|} \lt \epsilon\}$$ 

where $\theta \lt 0$ is some chosen fixed irrational number. It is easy to see this space is Hausdorff (using the fact that $\theta$ is irrational). However, the _closure_ of $N_{\epsilon, a, b}$ consists of points $(x, y)$ of $Q \times Q$ with either $(x-a) - \epsilon \leq (y-b)/\theta \leq (x-a) + \epsilon$ or $(x-a) - \epsilon \leq -(y-b)/\theta \leq (x-a) + \epsilon$, in other words, the union of two infinitely long strips of width $2\epsilon$ and slopes $\theta$, $-\theta$. Clearly any two such closures intersect, and therefore the space is connected. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example t
This example is due to [Golomb](#Golomb). Topologize the set of natural numbers $\mathbb{N}$ by taking a basis to consist of sets $A_{a,b} \coloneqq \{a k + b | k = 1,2, \ldots\}$, where $a, b \in \mathbb{N}$ are relatively prime. The space is Hausdorff, but the intersection of the closures of two non-empty open sets is never empty, so this space is connected. 
=-- 


## Connected components

Every topological space $X$ admits an [[equivalence relation]] $\sim$ where $x \sim y$ means that $x$ and $y$ belong to some subspace which is connected. The [[equivalence class]] $Conn(x)$ of an element $x$ is thus the union of all connected subspaces containing $x$; it follows readily from Result \ref{2} that $Conn(x)$ is itself connected. It is called the **connected component** of $x$. It is closed, by Result \ref{5}. A space is connected if and only if it has exactly one connected component (or at most one, if you allow the empty space to be connected).

There is another equivalence relation $\sim_q$ where $x \sim_q y$ if $f(x) = f(y)$ for every continuous $f: X \to D$ mapping to a [[discrete space]] $D$. The equivalence class of $x$ may be alternatively described as the intersection of all clopens that contain $x$. This is called the **quasi-component** of $x$, denoted here as $QConn(x)$. It is easy to prove that 

$$Conn(x) \subseteq QConn(x)$$ 

and that equality holds if $X$ is [[compact Hausdorff space|compact Hausdorff]] or is locally connected (see below), but also in other circumstances (such as the space of [[rational numbers]] as a [[topological subspace]] of the [[real line]]). 

+-- {: .num_example #comb} 
###### Example
For an example where $Conn(x) \neq QConn(x)$, take $X$ to be the following [[subspace]] of $[0, 1] \times [0, 1]$: 

$$X = \{(0, 0), (0, 1)\} \cup \bigcup_{n \geq 1} \{1/n\} \times [0, 1]$$ 

In this example, $Conn((0, 1)) = \{(0, 1)\}$, but $QConn((0, 1)) = \{(0, 0), (0, 1)\}$.  
=-- 


## Locally connected spaces

An entry point is given in the following remark/warning: 

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Warning

It is not generally true that a space is the coproduct (in $Top$) of its connected components, nor of its quasi-components. For example, the connected components in [[Cantor space]] $2^{\mathbb{N}}$ (with its topology as a product of 2-point discrete spaces) are just the singletons, but the coproduct of the singleton subspaces carries the discrete topology; another example with this feature is the set of [[rational numbers]] with its absolute-value topology (the one induced as a [[topological subspace]] of the [[real line]]).
=--

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition 
A space $X$ is **locally connected** if every open set, as a topological space, is the coproduct (in $Top$) of its connected components. Equivalently, a space is locally connected if every point has a neighborhood basis of connected open sets. 
=-- 

In a locally connected space, every connected component $S$ is clopen; in particular, connected components and quasi-components coincide. We warn that connected spaces need not be locally connected; for example, the topologist's sine curve of Example \ref{sine} is connected but not locally connected. 

Examples of locally connected spaces include [[manifold|topological manifolds]]. 

Let $i \colon LocConn \hookrightarrow Top$ be the full inclusion of locally connected spaces. The following result is straightforward but useful. 

+-- {: .num_theorem #coref} 
###### Theorem 
$LocConn$ is a coreflective subcategory of $Top$, i.e., the inclusion $i$ has a right adjoint $R$. For $X$ a given space, $R(X)$ has the same underlying set as $X$, topologized by letting connected components of open subspaces of $X$ generate a topology. 
=-- 

Being a coreflective category of a complete and cocomplete category, the category $LocConn$ is also complete and cocomplete. Of course, limits and particularly _infinite_ products in $LocConn$ are not calculated as they are in $Top$; rather one takes the limit in $Top$ and _then_ retopologizes it according to Theorem \ref{coref}. (For _finite_ products of locally connected spaces, we can just take the product in $Top$ -- the result will be again locally connected.) 

Let $\Gamma \colon LocConn \to Set$ be the underlying set functor, and let $\nabla, \Delta \colon Set \to LocConn$ be the functors which assign to a set the same set equipped with the codiscrete and discrete topologies, respectively. Let $\Pi_0 \colon LocConn \to Set$ be the functor which assigns to a locally connected space the set of its connected components. 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 
There is a string of adjoints 
$$\Pi_0 \dashv \Delta \dashv \Gamma \dashv \nabla \colon Set \to LocConn$$ 
and moreover, the functor $\Pi_0$ preserves finite products. 
=-- 

The proof is largely straightforward; we point out that the continuity of the unit $X \to \Delta \Pi_0 X$ is immediate from a locally connected space's being the coproduct of its connected components. As for $\Pi_0$ preserving finite products, write locally connected spaces $X$, $Y$ as coproducts of connected spaces 

$$X = \sum_i C_i; \qquad Y = \sum_j D_j;$$ 

then their product in $LocConn$ coincides with their product in $Top$, and is 

$$X \times Y \cong \sum_{i, j} C_i \times D_j$$ 

where each summand $C_i \times D_j$ is connected by Result \ref{3}. From this it is immediate that $\Pi_0$ preserves finite products. 

The category of [[sheaf topos|sheaves]] on a locally connected space is a [[locally connected topos]]. For related discussions, see also [[cohesive topos]]. 

Finally, 

+-- {: .un_defn} 
###### Definition 
A space $X$ is **totally disconnected** if its connected components are precisely the singletons of $X$. 
=-- 

In other words, a space is totally disconnected if its coreflection into $LocConn$ is discrete. Such spaces recur in the study of [[Stone spaces]]. 

The category of totally disconnected spaces is a reflective subcategory of $Top$. The reflector sends a space $X$ to the space $X/\sim$ whose points are the connected components of $X$, endowed with the quotient topology induced by the projection $q: X \to X/\sim$. Details may be found at [[totally disconnected space]]. 

### Quotients of locally connected spaces 

For future reference, we record the following result. 

+-- {: .num_lemma #quot} 
###### Lemma 
A quotient space of a locally connected space $X$ is also locally connected. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
Suppose $q: X \to Y$ is a quotient map, and let $V \subseteq Y$ be an open neighborhood of $y \in Y$. Let $C(y)$ be the connected component of $y$ in $V$; we must show $C(y)$ is open in $Y$. For that it suffices that $C = q^{-1}(C(y))$ be open in $X$, or that each $x \in C$ is an interior point. Since $X$ is locally connected, the connected component $U_x$ of $x$ in $q^{-1}(V)$ is open, and the subset $q(U_x) \subseteq V$ is connected, and therefore $q(U_x) \subseteq C(y)$ (as $C(y)$ is the maximal connected subset of $V$ containing $q(x)$). Hence $U_x \subseteq q^{-1}(C(y)) = C$, proving that $x$ is interior to $C$, as desired. 
=-- 

The conclusion does not follow if $q: X \to Y$ is merely surjective; e.g., there is a surjective (continuous) map from $\mathbb{R}$ to (a version of) the [[Warsaw circle]], but the latter is not locally connected. 


## Path-connectedness 

An important variation on the theme of connectedness is path-connectedness. 

+-- {: .num_defn #TopologicalSpacePath}
###### Definition
**(continuous path in a topological space)**

Let $(X,\tau)$ be a [[topological space]], Then a _continuous path_ (or just _path_, for short) in $(X,\tau)$ is a [[continuous function]] of the form

$$
  \gamma
   \;\colon\;
  [0,1]
    \longrightarrow
  (X,\tau)
$$

where the domain is the [[closed interval]] equipped with its [[Euclidean space|Euclidean]] [[subspace topology]].

One says that the path connects the point $\gamma(0) \in X$ with the point $\gamma(1) \in X$.

For $x \in X$ a fixed point, then the subset

$$
  PConn_x(X)
   \;\coloneqq\;
  \left\{
     y \in X
     \;\vert\;
    \underset{\text{path}\, \gamma}{\exists}
    \left(
      \left(
        \gamma(0) = x
      \right)
      \phantom{}
      \text{and}
      \phantom{A}
      \left(
        \gamma(1) = y
      \right)
    \right)
  \right\
$$

is called the _path-connected component_ of $x$. 

The set of path connected components of $X$ is denoted 

$$
  \pi_0(X)
  \,.
$$

=--

The set $\pi_0(X)$ of path components (the 0th "[[homotopy group]]") is thus the [[coequalizer]] in 
$$ \hom([0, 1], X) \stackrel{\overset{ev_0}{\to}}{\underset{ev_1}{\to}} \hom(1, X) \to \pi_0(X) .$$ 

Observe that this is a [[reflexive coequalizer]], as witnessed by the mutual right inverse $\hom(!, X): \hom(1, X) \to \hom([0, 1], X)$. 

(We can even topologize $\pi_0(X)$ by taking the coequalizer in $Top$ of 

$$X^{[0, 1]} \stackrel{\overset{ev_0}{\to}}{\underset{ev_1}{\to}} X,$$ 

taking advantage of the fact that the locally compact Hausdorff space $[0, 1]$ is [exponentiable](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/exponential+law+for+spaces). The resulting quotient space will be [[discrete space|discrete]] if $X$ is [[locally path-connected space|locally path-connected]].)   

We say $X$ is **path-connected** if it has exactly one path component.

It follows easily from the basic results [above](basic) that each path component $[x]$ is connected. However, it need not be closed (and therefore need not be the connected component of $x$); see the following example. The path components and connected components do coincide if $X$ is locally path-connected. 

+-- {: .num_example #sine}
###### Example 
The **topologist's sine curve**
$$ \{ (x, y) \in \mathbb{R}^2 \;:\; (0 \lt x \leq 1 \;\wedge\; y = sin(1/x)) \;\vee\; (0 = x \;\wedge\; -1 \leq y \leq 1) \} $$
provides a classic example where the path component of a point need not be closed. (Specifically, consider a point on the locus of $y = \sin(1/x)$.) 
=-- 

The basic categorical Results \ref{1}, \ref{2}, and \ref{3} above carry over upon replacing "connected" by "path-connected". (As of course does \ref{4}, trivially.) 

Finally, as a contrast to a path-connected space, a **totally path-disconnected** space is a space such that its set of path components is equal to the underlying set of the space. Equivalently, that there are no non-constant paths. This by far does not mean that the space is discrete! 

### Arc-connectedness 

A refinement of the notion of path-connected space is that of arc-connected (or arcwise-connected) space: 

+-- {: .num_defn} 
###### Definition 
A space $X$ is **arc-connected** if for any two distinct $x, y \in X$ there exists an _injective_ continuous map $\alpha: I \to X$ such that $\alpha(0) = x$ and $\alpha(1) = y$. 
=-- 

Arc-connected spaces are of course path-connected, but there are trivial examples (using an [[indiscrete topology]]) that the converse fails to hold. A rather nontrivial theorem is the following: 

+-- {: .num_theorem #arc} 
###### Theorem 
A path-connected [[Hausdorff space]] $X$ is arc-connected. 
=-- 

This immediately generalizes to the statement that in a Hausdorff space $X$, any two points that can be connected by a path $\alpha: I \to X$ can be connected by an arc: just apply the theorem to the image $\alpha(I)$. 

For a proof of this theorem, see [Willard](#Willard), theorem 31.2. More precisely, that result states that a _Peano space_, i.e., a [[compact space|compact]], connected, locally connected, and [[metrizable space]], is arc-connected if it is path-connected. It then suffices to observe that the continuous image $\alpha(I) \subseteq X $ of a path is in fact a Peano space, so that the path $\alpha: I \to \alpha(I)$ can be replaced by an arc. 

+-- {: .num_lemma} 
###### Lemma 
If $X$ is Hausdorff and there is a continuous surjection $f: I \to X$, then $X$ is a Peano space. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
Obviously $X$ is compact (Hausdorff) and connected. $X$ is a [[quotient space]] of $I$, since $f$ is a closed surjection (using compactness of $I$ and Hausdorffness of $X$), and therefore $X$ is locally connected by Lemma \ref{quot}. Being compact Hausdorff, $X$ is [[separation axiom|regular]], so to show metrizability it suffices by the [[Urysohn metrization theorem]] to show $X$ is second-countable. 

Let $\mathcal{B}$ be a countable base for $I$ and let $\mathcal{C}$ be the collection consisting of finite unions of elements of $\mathcal{B}$. We claim $\forall_f(\mathcal{C}) \coloneqq \{\forall_f(C) = \neg f(\neg C): C \in \mathcal{C}\}$ is an (evidently countable) base for $X$. Indeed, suppose $U \subseteq X$ is open and $p \in U$; then $f^{-1}(p)$ is compact, so there exist finitely many $B_1, \ldots, B_n \in \mathcal{B}$ with 

$$f^{-1}(p) \subseteq B_1 \cup \ldots \cup B_n \subseteq f^{-1}(U).$$ 

Put $C = B_1 \cup \ldots \cup B_n$. The first inclusion is equivalent to $p \in \forall_f(C)$ by the adjunction $f^{-1} \dashv \forall_f$. The second inclusion implies $\forall_f(C) \subseteq \forall_f f^{-1}(U) = U$, where the equality $\forall_f f^{-1} = id$, equivalent to $\exists_f f^{-1} = id$, follows from surjectivity of $f$. Thus we have shown $\forall_f(\mathcal{C})$ is a base. 
=-- 

The converse of this lemma is the celebrated [[Hahn-Mazurkiewicz theorem]]: 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 
Let $X$ be a nonempty Hausdorff space. Then there exists a continuous surjection $\alpha: [0, 1] \to X$ if $X$ is a Peano space. In particular, a nonempty Peano space is path-connected. 
=-- 

(The terminology "Peano space" is given in recognition of Peano's discovery of space-filling curves, as for example the unit square.)  

### Path-components functor 

As above, let $\pi_0 \colon Top \to Set$ be the functor which assigns to each space $X$ its set of path components $\pi_0(X)$. 

+-- {: .un_prop} 
###### Proposition 
The functor $\pi_0 \colon Top \to Set$ preserves arbitrary products. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
Let $X_i$ be a family of spaces; we must show that the comparison map 

$$\pi_0(\prod_i X_i) \to \prod_i \pi_0(X_i)$$ 

is invertible. Injectivity: suppose $(x_i), (y_i) \in \prod_i X_i$ are tuples that map to the same tuple of path-components $(c_i)$; we must show that $(x_i)$ and $(y_i)$ belong to the same path component. For each $i$, both $x_i$ and $y_i$ belong to $c_i$, so we may choose a path $\alpha_i: I \to X_i$ connecting $x_i$ to $y_i$. Then $\langle \alpha_i \rangle \colon I \to \prod_i X_i$ connects $(x_i)$ to $(y_i)$. (Note this uses the [[axiom of choice]].) Surjectivity: for any tuple $(c_i) \in \prod_i \pi_0(X_i)$, the component $c_i$ is nonempty for each $i$, so we may choose an element $x_i$ therein. Then $(x_i)$ maps to $(c_i)$. Again this uses the axiom of choice. 
=-- 

An elegant proof of the previous proposition but for preservation of _finite_ products is as follows: both $\hom(I, -)$ and $\hom(1, -)$ preserve products, and a [[reflexive coequalizer]] of product-preserving functors $C \to Set$, being a [[sifted colimit]], is also product-preserving. 

+-- {: .un_prop} 
###### Proposition 
The functor $\pi_0 \colon Top \to Set$ preserves arbitrary coproducts. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
####### Proof 
The functor $\hom(I, -) \colon Top \to Set$ preserves coproducts since $I$ is connected, and similarly for $\hom(1, -)$. The coequalizer of a pair of natural transformations between coproduct-preserving functors is also a coproduct-preserving functor. 
=-- 

### Pseudo-arcs 

Point-set topology is filled with counterexamples. An unusual type of example is that of pseudo-arc: 

+-- {: .num_defn} 
###### Definition 
A _pseudo-arc_ is a [[continuum|metric continuum]] with more than one point such that every subcontinuum (a subspace that is a continuum) cannot be expressed as a union of two proper subcontinua. 
=-- 

A pseudo-arc $X$ is necessarily totally path-disconnected: two distinct points $x, y$ of $X$ cannot be connected by a path in $X$. Indeed, the image of such a# path would be a path-connected Hausdorff space, hence arc-connected by Theorem \ref{arc}. Letting $\alpha: [0, 1] \to X$ be an arc from $x$ to $y$, we have that the continuum $\alpha([0, 1])$ is a union of proper subcontinua $\alpha([0, 1/2])$ and $\alpha([1/2, 1])$, a contradiction. Thus, a pseudo-arc is an example of a compact connected metrizable space that is totally path-disconnected. 

Remarkably, all pseudo-arcs are homeomorphic, and a pseudo-arc is a [[homogeneous space]]. Perhaps also remarkable is the fact that the collection of pseudo-arcs in the [[Hilbert cube]] $Q$ (or in any Euclidean space) is a dense $G_\delta$ set (see [[G-delta set]]) in the [[Polish space]] of all nonempty compact subsets of $Q$ under the [[Hausdorff metric]]; see [Bing2](#Bing2), theorem 2. 

A typical way in which pseudo-arcs arise is through [[inverse limits]] of [[dynamical systems]]. One of the original constructions is due to Henderson: 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 
There is a $C^\infty$ function $f: I \to I$ such that the limit of the diagram 

$$\ldots \stackrel{f}{\to} I \stackrel{f}{\to} I \stackrel{f}{\to} I$$ 

is a pseudo-arc. 
=-- 

Roughly speaking, Henderson's $f$ is a small "notched" perturbation of the squaring function $[0, 1] \to [0, 1]: x \mapsto x^2$, as illustrated on page 38 (of 58) [here](http://www.akasimikrasna.sk/uploads/1/4/1/0/14106449/spitalsky2014.pdf). 


## Related concepts

* [[locally connected topos]] 

* [[cohesive topos]] 

* [[contractible topological space]]

* [[almost connected topological group]]

* A space in which the only connected subspaces are the singletons and the empty set is called [[totally disconnected space]].

* The connected subsets of a space form a [[connectology]].


## References 

Examples of countable connected Hausdorff spaces were give in 

* R.H. Bing, A connected countable Hausdorff space, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 4
(1953), 474.
{#Bing} 

* Solomon W. Golomb, _A Connected Topology for the Integers_, Amer. Math. Monthly, Vol. 66 No. 8 (Oct. 1959), 663-665.
{#Golomb} 

Material on arc-connected spaces and the Hahn-Mazurkiewicz theorem can be found in Chapter 31 of 

* Stephen Willard, _General Topology_, Addison-Wesley 1970. ([online](http://www.scribd.com/doc/132023793/44283132-General-Topology-Stephen-Willard#scribd)) 
 {#Willard} 

Material on pseudo-arcs can be found in 

* R.H. Bing, _Concerning hereditarily indecomposable continua_, Pacific J. Math. Volume 1, Number 1 (1951), 43-51. ([Project Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.pjm/1102613150)) 
 {#Bing2}


[[!redirects connected space]]
[[!redirects connected spaces]]
[[!redirects connected topological space]]
[[!redirects connected topological spaces]]

[[!redirects locally connected space]]
[[!redirects locally connected spaces]]
[[!redirects locally connected topological space]]
[[!redirects locally connected topological spaces]]

[[!redirects path-connected space]]
[[!redirects path-connected space]]
[[!redirects path-connected spaces]]

[[!redirects path connected space]]
[[!redirects path connected topological space]]
[[!redirects path connected spaces]]


[[!redirects pathwise connected space]]
[[!redirects pathwise connected spaces]]
[[!redirects pathwise connected topological space]]
[[!redirects pathwise connected topological spaces]]
[[!redirects path-connected topological space]]
[[!redirects path-connected topological spaces]]
[[!redirects pathwise connected]]


[[!redirects connected component]]
[[!redirects connected components]]

[[!redirects path component]]
[[!redirects path components]]

[[!redirects path-component]]
[[!redirects path-components]]

