
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Étale morphisms
+--{: .hide}
[[!include etale morphisms - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A [[continuous map]] $f : X \to Y$ between [[topological spaces]] is called a _local homeomorphism_ if restricted to a [[neighbourhood]] of every point in its [[domain]] it becomes a [[homeomorphism]] onto its image which is required
to be open.

One also says that this exhibits $X$ as an [[étale space]] over $Y$.

Notice that, despite the similarity of terms, local homeomorphisms are, in general, _not_ [[local isomorphisms]] in any natural way. See the [examples](#Examples) below.

## Definition

A **local homeomorphism**  is a [[continuous map]] $p : E \to B$ between [[topological space]]s (a [[morphism]] in [[Top]]) such that

* for every $e \in E$, there is an open set $U \ni e$ such that the [[image]] $p_*(U)$ is open in $B$ and the restriction of $p$ to $U$ is a [[homeomorphism]] $p|_U: U \to p_*(U)$,

or equivalently

* for every $e \in E$, there is a [[neighbourhood]] $U$ of $e$ such that the image $p_*(U)$ is a neighbourhood of $p(e)$ and $p|_U: U \to p_*(U)$ is a homeomorphism.

See also [[etale space]].

## Examples
 {#Examples}

For $X$ any [[topological space]] and  for $S$ any [[set]] regarded as a [[discrete space]], the [[projection]]

$$
  X \times S \to X
$$

is a local homeomorphism.

For $\{U_i \to Y\}$ an [[open cover]], let 

$$
  X := \coprod_i U_i
$$

be the [[disjoint union]] space of all the pathches. Equipped with the canonical projection

$$
  \coprod_i U_i \to Y
$$

this is a local homeomorphism.

In general, for every [[sheaf]] $A$ of sets on $Y$; there is a local homeomorphism $X \to Y$ such that over any open $U \hookrightarrow X$ the set $A(U)$ is naturally identified with the set of [[sections]] of $Y \to X$. See [[étale space]] for more on this.



## Related concepts

* [[étale map]], [[étale morphism]]

* [[locally homeomorphic geometric morphism]]


[[!redirects local homeomorphisms]]