## Idea

A _reflexive object_ is a model of the pure (untyped) [[lambda calculus]] validating the $\beta$ law (and sometimes also the $\eta$ law) as an equation between morphisms.

## Definition

A **reflexive object** in a [[cartesian closed category]] is an object $U$ equipped with a pair of maps

$$
\array{U & \overset{a}{\underset{\ell}{\rightleftarrows}} & U^U} 
$$

such that $a \circ \ell = 1$.  In other words, a reflexive object is an object $U$ together with data $U^U \lhd U$ exhibiting $U^U$ as a [[retract]] of $U$.   A reflexive object is said to be **strict** (or **extensional**) when also $\ell \circ a = 1$, so that there is an isomorphism $U^U \cong U$.

## Remarks

* Given a reflexive object $(U,a,\ell)$, any closed term $t$ of pure lambda calculus can be interpreted as a [[global element]] $[[t]] : 1 \to U$, while in general a term with $n$ free variables can be interpreted as a morphism $[[t]] : U^n \to U$.  Formally, one can view this interpretation as first passing via the representation of $t$ as [[higher-order abstract syntax]], and then using the morphisms $a$ and $\ell$ to interpret $a$pplication and $\ell$ambda, respectively.

* The equation $a \circ \ell = 1$ ("application after lambda is the identity") represents the $\beta$ reduction rule $(\lambda x.t)u \to t[u/x]$ in undirected form.  The additional equation $\ell \circ a = 1$ corresponds to the undirected form of $\eta$, but is not assumed as part of the standard definition of reflexive object.

* Note that the definition may be naturally generalized to any [[closed category]], not necessarily cartesian.  For example, a reflexive object in a [[symmetric monoidal closed category]] is a model of [[linear logic|linear lambda calculus]].

## Examples

The [[terminal object]] of a ccc provides a degenerate example of a (strict) reflexive object, and for cardinality reasons, this is the only reflexive object in [[Set]].

A non-degenerate model of untyped lambda calculus was first described by [[Dana Scott]], who solved the cardinality issue by replacing sets with [[algebraic lattices]], and arbitrary set-theoretic functions by [[Scott topology|Scott-continuous]] functions.  In ([Scott 1976](#Scott76)), he constructed a (non-strict) reflexive object with carrier the lattice $P\omega$ of all [[subsets]] of the non-negative integers, and with the maps $a$ and $\ell$ (there called "fun" and "graph") defined as follows:

$$a(u)(x) = \{m \mid \exists e_n \subseteq x. (n,m) \in u\}$$

$$\ell(f) = \{(n,m) \mid m \in f(e_n)\}$$

Here $e_n$ stands for the set whose elements are the exponents in the binary expansion of $n$ (thus $e_n$ is the $n$th subset in the standard enumeration of finite subsets of $\omega$), while "$(n,m)$" stands for the standard enumeration of pairs of integers

$$(n,m) = \frac{1}{2}(n+m)(n+m+1)+m$$

## References

The model of lambda calculus using the lattice of subsets of the integers was described in the following paper:

* {#Scott76} Dana Scott. Data types as lattices. _SIAM Journal of Computing_, 5(3):522--587, September 1976.

Scott made the underlying categorical structure explicit in a later paper, where he introduced the definition of a reflexive object in a ccc:

* {#Scott80} Dana Scott. Relating theories of the $\lambda$-calculus. In _To H.B. Curry: Essays on Combinatory Logic, Lambda-Calculus and Formalism_ (eds. Hindley and Seldin), Academic Press, 403--450, 1980.

See also:

* [[Martin Hyland]]. Classical lambda calculus in modern dress. To appear in _Mathematical Structures in Computer Science_, 2013. [arxiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/1211.5762)

## Related concepts

* [[lambda calculus]]
* [[domain theory]]
* [[lambda theory]]