
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Topology
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Locally compact spaces
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Definition

A [[topological space]] is __locally compact__ if every point has a [[neighborhood base]] consisting of [[compact subspaces]]. It may be considered as an example of a [[nice topological space]]. 

Note: as observed in the discussion at [[compact space]], many authors choose to include the [[Hausdorff space|Hausdorff]] condition as a matter of course, calling locally compact not-necessarily-Hausdorff spaces 'locally quasi-compact'. We will not follow that convention here, but the reader should be warned that without the Hausdorff hypothesis, there are several inequivalent notions of local compactness in the literature; see [the English Wikipedia](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Locally_compact_space) for a survey and counterexamples.

A locally compact [[Hausdorff space|Hausdorff]] space may also be called a _local compactum_; compare [[compactum]].


## Examples

1. Clearly, any [[discrete space]] is locally compact. 

2. An [[open subspace]] of a compact Hausdorff space is locally compact. In fact, every locally compact Haudorff space $X$ arises in this way, since it can be considered an open subspace in its [[one-point compactification]] $X \sqcup \{\infty\}$ (where the open neighborhoods of the adjoined point $\infty$ are precisely those of the form $K^c \sqcup \{\infty\}$, where $K^c$ is the complement of a compact subset $K \subseteq X$). 

3. The reals, complexes, and $\mathfrak{p}$-adic completions of [[algebraic number field]]s (with respect to a prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$ in the ring of integers) are locally compact. In characteristic $p$, the field of [[Laurent series]] $\mathbb{F}_q((t))$ over a finite field with $q$ elements, topologized with respect to a discrete valuation, is locally compact. In fact, any non-discrete locally compact [[field]] must be of one of these types; they are called [[local field]]s. 

4. Finite products of locally compact spaces are locally compact. [[closed subspace|Closed subspaces]] of locally compact spaces are locally compact. (Hence locally compact spaces form a [[finitely complete category]].) 

5. Topological [[manifold]]s (including "pathological examples" like [[long line]]s), being locally homeomorphic to $\mathbb{R}^n$, are locally compact. 

6. The only Hausdorff [[topological vector space]]s that are locally compact are finite-dimensional Euclidean spaces. More generally, a TVS is locally compact if and only if its Hausdorff quotient has finite dimension. 


## Properties

### Category-theoretic properties

Perhaps the most important consequence of local compactness (as defined above) for categorical topology is that locally compact spaces are [[exponential object|exponentiable]], i.e., if $Y$ is locally compact, then $Y \times -: Top \to Top$ has a [[adjunction|right adjoint]] $(-)^Y: Top \to Top$. In fact, this is almost an abstract definition of local compactness: for $T_0$ spaces, local compactness is equivalent to being exponentiable. This situation generalises to [[locales]]: a result of Hyland is that locale is [[locally compact locale|locally compact]] if and only if it is exponentiable.  (See [[exponential law for spaces]] for more details.) 

As noted above, locally compact spaces form a finitely complete [[full subcategory]] of $Top$. It is not true that arbitrary products of locally compact spaces are locally compact. However, some important examples of locally compact spaces are constructed as restricted direct products, as follows. 

Let $(X_p, K_p)_{p \in P}$ be a collection of pairs of spaces where each $X_p$ is locally compact and $K_p \subseteq X_p$ is a compact _open_ subspace. The **restricted direct product** of the collection is the colimit of the [[filtered category|filtered diagram]] consisting of spaces 
$$D_F = \prod_{p \in F} X_p \times \prod_{p \notin F} K_p$$ 
where $F$ ranges over all finite subsets of $P$, together with inclusions $D_F \subseteq D_{F'}$ where $F \subseteq F'$. We observe that each of the $D_F$ is locally compact, and that a filtered colimit or union of a system of _open_ inclusions of locally compact spaces is again locally compact. Therefore, restricted direct products are locally compact, under the hypotheses stated above. 

These hypotheses are of course pretty severe; important examples of such restricted direct products include topologized [[adele ring]]s and [[idele group]]s. In the case of adele rings, the collection of pairs is $(K_{\mathfrak{p}}, O_{\mathfrak{p}})$ where $K_{\mathfrak{p}}$ is the $\mathfrak{p}$-adic completion of a [[number field]] $K$ and $O_{\mathfrak{p}}$ is the $\mathfrak{p}$-adic completion of the ring of integers $O \subseteq K$. 

In any event, the category of locally compact spaces does not admit general infinite products. If it did, then so would the category of locally compact Hausdorff spaces, and so would the category of locally compact Hausdorff abelian groups. However, there is no product of countably many copies of the real numbers in $LCHAb$, for if there were, then by utilizing the universal property of the product, it would become a Hausdorff TVS over the real numbers, in contradiction to the fact that the only locally compact Hausdorff TVS are finite-dimensional. 

Locally compact spaces _are_ closed under [[coproduct]]s in $Top$. They do not admit many types of [[colimit]]s generally; in some sense this is a _raison d\'être_ for [[compactly generated space]]s: they are precisely the colimits in $Top$ of diagrams of locally compact spaces. 


### Gelfand duality

Under [[Gelfand duality]] the category of compact Hausdorff topological spaces is equivalent to the [[opposite category]] of commutative [[C-star algebras]]. With some care there are generalizations of this also to locally compact topological spaces. See at _[[Gelfand duality]]_ for more.



### Further properties 

Locally compact Hausdorff spaces are [[paracompact space|paracompact]] whenever they are also [[second-countable space|second-countable]].


## Related concepts

* [[compact topological space]]

* [[locally compact locale]]

* [[Gelfand duality]]

* [[vanishing at infinity]]


[[!redirects locally compact topological space]]
[[!redirects locally compact topological spaces]]

[[!redirects locally compact Hausdorff topological space]]
[[!redirects locally compact Hausdorff topological spaces]]
[[!redirects locally compact Hausdorff]]

[[!redirects locally compact space]]
[[!redirects locally compact spaces]]
[[!redirects locally compact]]

[[!redirects locally compact Hausdorff space]]
[[!redirects locally compact Hausdorff spaces]]
[[!redirects local compactum]]
[[!redirects local compactums]]
[[!redirects local compacta]]
[[!redirects locally compactum]]
[[!redirects locally compactums]]
[[!redirects locally compacta]]
