Michael Friedman is an American philosopher. He has a developed a neo-Kantian philosophy which looks

> to understand the concrete historical process by which mathematical structures, physical theories of space, time, and motion, and mechanical constitutive principles organically evolve together so as to issue,  successively, in increasingly sophisticated mathematical representations of experience. ([Friedman 2010, p. 698](#Fried10))

This he does in particular through detailed historical studies of the response of [[Kant]] response to [[Newtonian]] physics and that of the [[Vienna Circle]] to Einstein's [[general relativity]].



* [Wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Friedman_%28philosopher%29)

## Related entries

* [[philosophy of science]]

* [[David Corfield]], _[[davidcorfield:Friedman's Dynamics of Reason]]_, [slides](https://ncatlab.org/davidcorfield/files/WIP2.pdf).

## Selected writings

* _Foundations of Space-Time Theories: Relativistic Physics and Philosophy of Science_ (1983), Princeton University Press.

* _Kant and the Exact Sciences_ (1992), Harvard University Press.

* _Reconsidering Logical Positivism_ (1999), Cambridge University Press

* _A Parting of the Ways:  Carnap, Cassirer, and Heidegger_ (2000), Open Court.

* _Dynamics of Reason: The 1999 Kant Lectures at Stanford University_ (2001), CSLI/University of Chicago Press.

* {#Fried10} _Synthetic History Reconsidered_ (2010) in Mary Domski and Michael Dickson (eds.), Discourse on a New Method: Reinvigorating the Marriage of History and Philosophy of Science, pp. 571–813.

* _Extending the Dynamics of Reason_ (2011), Erkenntnis 75(3): 431-444.

* _Kant’s Construction of Nature_ (2013), Cambridge University Press.

On the early history of the discussion of the [[braid group]]:

* [[Michael Friedman]], *Mathematical formalization and diagrammatic reasoning: the case study of the braid group between 1925 and 1950*, British Journal for the History of Mathematics **34** 1 (2019) 43-59 &lbrack;[doi:10.1080/17498430.2018.1533298](https://doi.org/10.1080/17498430.2018.1533298)&rbrack;



category: people
