[[!redirects Herrmann Minkowski]]
[[!redirects Herrmann Minkowski]]


* [Wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hermann_Minkowski)


## Selected writings
 {#SelectedWritings}

On [[quadratic forms]]:

* [[Hermann Minkowski]], _Grundlagen f&#252;r eine Theorie der quadratischen Formen mit ganzzahligen Koeffizienten, M&#233;moires pr&#233;sent&#233;s par divers savants a l'Acad&#180;emie des Sciences de l'institut national de France_, Tome XXIX, No. 2. 1884.

* [[Hermann Minkowski]], _Untersuchungen &#252;ber quadratische Formen. Bestimmung der Anzahl verschiedener Formen, die ein gegebenes Genus enth&#228;lt_, K&#246;nigsberg 1885; Acta Mathematica 7 (1885), 201&#8211;258


On what is now called [[Minkowski spacetime]]:

* {#Minkowski07} [[Hermann Minkowski]], _Die Grundgleichungen für die elektromagnetischen Vorgänge in bewegten Körpern_,  Math. Ann. (1910) 68: 472, reprinted from: Nachrichten der Kgl. Ges. d. Wiss. zu Göttingen, Math.-phys. Kl., Sitzung vom 21. Dezember 1907 ([doi:10.1007/BF01455871](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01455871))

> {#TheViewsOfSpaceAndTime} The views of space and time that I wish to lay before you have sprung from the soil of experimental physics, and therein lies their strength. They are radical. Henceforth space by itself, and time by itself, are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of both will retain an independent reality.

> (Address to the 80th Assembly of German Natural Scientists and Physicians, (Sep 21, 1908), see [WikiQuote](https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Hermann_Minkowski))


## related $n$Lab entries

* [[quadratic form]], [[Minkowski metric]]

* [[Minkowski spacetime]]
 

category: people