
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Higher geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}




## Idea ##

A _neighbourhood_ (or _neighborhood_) of a point $x$ in some space $X$ is a set $U$ such that there is enough room around $x$ in $U$ to move in any direction (but perhaps not very far).  One writes $x \in U^\circ$, $U \stackrel{\circ}\ni x$, or any of the six other obvious variations to indicate that $U$ is a neighbourhood of $x$.


## Definitions ##

In a [[topological space]] $X$, let a _point_ in $X$ be an element of $X$ and let a _set_ in $X$ be a [[subset]] of $X$.

Then a set $U$ is a __neighbourhood__ of a point $x$ if there exists an [[open set]] $G$ such that $x \in G$ and $G \subseteq U$.

A set $U$ is an __open neighbourhood__ of a point $x$ if $U$ is open and $x \in U$; many authors use the simple term 'neighbourhood' only for *open* neighbourhoods.

As the term implies, an open neighbourhood is precisely a neighbourhood that is open.  One can also define _closed neighbourhoods_, _compact neighbourhoods_, etc.


## Properties ##

* When definitions of topological concepts are given in terms of neighbourhoods, it often makes no difference if the neighbourhoods are required to be open or not.  There should be some deep logical reason for this ....

* The neighbourhoods of a given point form a proper [[filter]], the __neighbourhood filter__ of that point.  A __local (sub)[[base]]__ for the topology at that point is a (sub)base for that filter.


* The concept of [[topological space]] can be defined by taking the neighbourhood relation as primitive.  One axiom is more complicated than the others; if it is dropped, then the result is the definition of [[pretopological space]].

## Related concepts

[[!include infinitesimal and local - table]]


[[!redirects neighborhood]]
[[!redirects neighbourhood]]
[[!redirects neighborhoods]]
[[!redirects neighbourhoods]]
[[!redirects neighbourhood filter]]
[[!redirects neighborhood filter]]
[[!redirects neighbourhood filters]]
[[!redirects neighborhood filters]]
[[!redirects local base]]
[[!redirects local bases]]
[[!redirects local subbase]]
[[!redirects local subbases]]

[[!redirects open neighborhood]]
[[!redirects open neighbourhood]]
[[!redirects open neighborhoods]]
[[!redirects open neighbourhoods]]
