
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The next higher [[dimension|dimensional]] generalization of the concept of a _[[relativistic particle]]_ and a _[[relativistic string]]_ is called the relativistic _membrane_.

The concept of a [[bosonic modality|bosonic]] membrane was considered already by [Dirac 62](#Dirac62) as a hypothetical [[model (in theoretical physics)|model]] for the [[electron]], then abandoned and eventually re-incarnated as the "super-membrane in 11d" due to [Bergshoeff-Sezgin-Townsend 87](#BergshoeffSezginTownsend87) (whose "m" became the "M" in "[[M-theory]]"), namely the [[Green-Schwarz sigma-model for super p-branes]] corresponding to the [[brane scan]]-entry with $p=2$, $D=11$, now commonly known as the _[[M2-brane]]_.

In fact, according to the [[brane scan]], a [[super p-brane|super 2-brane]] [[sigma model]] exists on [[superspacetimes]] of dimension 4, 5, 7, and 11:

* 4: [[super 2-brane in 4d]]

* 5: [[super 2-brane in 5d]]

* 7: ...

* 11: [[M2-brane]]

## Related concepts

* &#180;[[membrane instanton]]

## References

### Pre-history

Early speculations trying to unify the [[electron]] and the [[muon]] as two excitations of a single relativistic membrane:

* {#Dirac62} [[Paul Dirac]], _An Extensible Model of the Electron_, Proc. Roy. Soc. A268, (1962) 57-67 ([jstor:2414316](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2414316))

  (also proposing the [[Dirac-Born-Infeld action]])

* [[Paul Dirac]], _The motion of an Extended Particle in the Gravitational Field_, in Relativistic Theories of Gravitation, Proceedings of a Conference held in Warsaw and Jablonna, July 1962, ed. L. Infeld, P. W. N. Publishers, 1964, Warsaw, 163-171; discussion 171-175 ([spire:1623740](http://inspirehep.net/record/1623740))

* [[Paul Dirac]], _Particles of Finite Size in the Gravitational Field_, Proc. Roy. Soc. A270, (1962) 354-356 ([doi:10.1098/rspa.1962.0228](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1962.0228))


[[!include fundamental M2-brane sigma-model -- references]]

[[!include quantization of M2-brane to matrix model -- references]]


[[!redirects membranes]]

[[!redirects relativistic membrane]]
[[!redirects relativistic membranes]]

[[!redirects super-membrane]]
[[!redirects super membrane]]
[[!redirects supermembrane]]
[[!redirects super-membranes]]
[[!redirects super membranes]]
[[!redirects supermembranes]]

