## Definition

A **topological map** (or **embedded graph**) $M$ is a [[graph]] $G = (V,E,d)$ (loops and multiple edges allowed) equipped with an embedding $\theta$ of $G$ into a [[surface]] $X$ in such a way that:

1. vertices $x \in V$ are represented as distinct points $\theta(x) \in X$;

2. edges $e \in E$ are represented as curves $\theta(e)$ on the surface $X$ that intersect only at the vertices;

3. the complement $X \setminus \theta(G)$ of the graph on the surface is a disjoint union of connected components, called _faces_, each [[homeomorphic]] to an open [[disk]] (in other words, each face is [[simply connected]]).

These conditions can be summarized by saying that $\theta$ is a _cellular embedding_ (or "2-cell embedding").  Additionally, one may place several conditions on the underlying surface:

* $X$ is [[compact space|compact]]
* $X$ is [[connected space|connected]]
* $X$ is [[oriented]]
* $X$ is without [[boundary]]

Topological maps are always considered up to the appropriate notion of homeomorphism, and they inherit various properties of the underlying surface.  For example, a graph embedded in a connected surface is itself necessarily a connected graph, and one speaks of the _genus_ of a map as the [[genus of a surface|genus]] of the underlying surface $X$.

## Permutation representations

One of the remarkable properties of topological maps is that they can be given a purely algebraic representation as a collection of permutations satisfying a few properties.  For now, see the articles ([[cartographic group]]) and ([[combinatorial map]]).

## Related concepts

* [[combinatorial map]]

* [[ribbon graph]]

* [[child's drawing]]

* [[branched cover of the Riemann sphere]]

## References

* [[Gareth A. Jones]] and [[David Singerman]], Theory of Maps on Orientable Surfaces. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 37:273-307, 1978.

Fairly elementary sources for background material include:
 
* Arthur T. White: 1984 _Graphs, groups and surfaces_
  {#White1984}

This gives the Edmonds algorithm which given a graph and some permutations outputs an embedding. The original source for that is:

* J. Edmonds (1960), A combinatorial representation for polyhedral surfaces, Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 7, 646.

More recent treatments can be found in:

* Sergei K. Lando and Alexander K. Zvonkin, _Graphs on Surfaces and Their Applications_, Springer, 2004.

[[!redirects topological maps]]
[[!redirects embedded graph]]
[[!redirects embedded graphs]]
