
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Lie theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-Lie theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Given a Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}$ over the [[real numbers]] or [[complex numbers]], and gives a choice $\{t_0, t_a\}_{a \in I}$ of [[linear basis]] of $\mathfrak{g}$, the corresponding _Inönü-Wigner contraction_ is the Lie algebra obtained by "sending $t_0$ to zero", i.e. the Lie algebra obtained from the previous one by passing to basis elements $\{\epsilon t_0, t_a\}_{a \in I}$ with $\epsilon$ in the ground field, in the [[limit of a sequence|limit]] that $\epsilon \to 0$.


## References

The original article is

* [[Erdal İnönü]], [[Eugene Wigner]] (1953). _On the Contraction of Groups and Their Representations_. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 39 (6): 510–24. 

See also

* Wikipedia, _[Group contraction](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_contraction)_

*  E. J. Saletan,  _Contraction of Lie Groups_. Journal of Mathematical Physics 2: 1–1 (1961)


[[!redirects Lie algebra contractions]]

[[!redirects group contraction]]
[[!redirects group contractions]]

[[!redirects Lie group contraction]]
[[!redirects Lie group contractions]]


[[!redirects İnönü-Wigner contraction]]
[[!redirects İnönü-Wigner contractions]]

[[!redirects Inönü-Wigner contraction]]
[[!redirects Inönü-Wigner contractions]]

[[!redirects Inonu-Wigner contraction]]
[[!redirects Inonu-Wigner contractions]]

[[!redirects Inönü-Wigner group contraction]]
[[!redirects Inönü-Wigner group contractions]]