# Motivation #

Recently, [[Johan Alm]] wrote a very neat paper

* [Quantization as a Kan Extension](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/Kantization09May27.pdf)

The paper proves an aspect of 

* [The n-Cafe Quantum Conjecture](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2007/06/the_ncaf_quantum_conjecture.html)

suggested by [[Urs Schreiber]]. A summary of Alm's paper with many motivating references is provided [[Quantization as a Kan Extension|here]].

This page represents an experiment similar to the [[geometric infinity-function theory|Journal Club's]] effort to understand the papers

* **IntTrans** David Ben-Zvi, John Francis, David Nadler, _Integral transforms and Drinfeld Centers in Derived Geometry_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/0805.0157))

* **CharTheo** David Ben-Zvi, David Nadler, _The Character Theory of a Complex Group_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/0904.1247))

The goal is to build up, step-by-step, the background knowledge required to understand Alm's paper. The finite model considered is simple enough that we hope to advance our understanding of elementary concepts that are mostly taken for granted by the experts here at n-Headquarters.

When we are done, we hope to have a complete, self-contained presentation that should be accessible to mildly sophisticated undergraduate physics and mathematics students.

We also hope that the experts will keep an eye on us and when we get stuck, might gently nudge us in the right direction. As always, this page is open to all. Any questions or contributions are more than welcome.

# Collection of Concepts #

Maybe we can start by skimming the paper and collecting some unfamiliar keywords so that we can begin the process of tracing back definitions.

* [[Kan extension]]
* etc

#References#

* [Action as a Functor](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/qg-fall2004/action.pdf)
* [Connections as Functors](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/qg-fall2004/connection.pdf)
* [Categorifying Fundamental Physics](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/diary/fqxi_narrative.pdf)

#Discussion#

_Daniel_: On page 3, he writes: "Usually, one has a classical 'action' of some kind definedned for manifolds with some extra structure, e.g. a riemannian metric, a symplectic form, a principalbundle, or etc. Quantization is what happens when one tries to assign that same action to a manifold that does not have that structure!" We can define many structures over a manifolds. Like, a toplogy, a piecewise linear strucure, a metric, etc. Just like the layers of an onion. So, quantization is just summing over all possible new layers of every new structure? It looks like so.

_Toby_:  That seems like a wild idea to me, but it does seem to be what he\'s saying.  And what\'s really wild is that he just might be right!

_Daniel_:I am trying to understand why Kan extension were used in that way to define quantiation, and it came up to me that listing how concepts are speculatively both involved in both QM and Kan extensions might be useful. 

-Using left and right Kan extensions simultaneously seems to be required because QM mechanics needs symmetric everywhere defined operators. 

-The “everywhere” follows from the arbitrary path taken to carry a state. 

-“Symmetric” follows that both left and right are similar definitions, but they are different because of the direction to where tha natural functor maps. 

-Operator is the so called Z, in which the author calls the quantum theory.

-Further, such operator is self-adjoint. Using both of them at the same time makes the functorial definition of adjoint functor work as a self adjoint functor, because as stated above, given that the natural map works both ways, you can define projection operators in antagonistic, but equivalent ways.

-So, using both of them leads to the proper definition of a normed operator, because you have antatonistic projections.

-The definition of Kan extension forces all natural functors to filter uniquely all paths, which means that the outcome of a measurement will be unique. Since all possible configurations will be taken into consideration and projected, it sounds to be reasonable to me to think that the operator will be unitary.

_Eric_: It looks like you're making good progress! I'm still trying to understand Kan extensions. I'm even still shaky on functors :) My goal is to start with the linear map examples on [[functor]], i.e. one-object [[endomorphism|full subcategories]] of [[FinVect]] and see what Kan extension means there. I wouldn't be broken hearted if someone spoiled the fun and explained it.

_Daniel_: Actualy no! I am trying to understand Kan extensions going backwards from QM! I am just waiting to someone to tell me if the above makes sense. Otherwise, I will remain completely confused as I am indeed now... Worse, people can take seriously what I wrote! 

_Eric_: "I am trying to understand Kan extensions going backwards from QM!" I am REALLY happy to see statements like that. That is really what I hope to get out of this exercise too. If we can get to the point where the mathematical concept of "Kan extension" can actually be understood in terms of QM, that would be pretty cool.

***

_Eric_: There is something about Kan extension that reminds me of some kind of linear least squares. I started trying to make it explicit by building an example with finite-dimensional vector spaces. I placed the example at [[functor]]. It seems like left and right Kan extensions are like left and right inverses (which in my universe means linear least squares).

_Daniel_: Eric, I don't understand why you wrote on  [[functor]] specificaly about linear least squares, it doesn't seem to have any special relation to do with what I found [on wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_least_squares), other then being just a general observation about linear spaces.

_Eric_: Hi Daniel, have a look a <a href="http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2008/03/limits_and_pushforward.html#c024063">John's explanation</a> of Kan extension. What he described made me think of linear least squares (which has nothing to do with any wikipedia article). I was trying to work out an example where Kan extension really did turn out to be linear least squares, but expressed rather in terms of left and right inverses. I may be completely wrong about the relation, but before I can judge, I needed functors between vector spaces thought of as one-object categories, hence the examples on [[functor]]. My goal is to get to the point where I feel fairly comfortable with Kan extension and then try to understand it in the context of Alm's paper.

_Toby_:  Can you explain what linear least squares is, then, if it has nothing to do with what\'s on that Wikipedia article? (which is the only linear least squares that I\'m familiar with myself).

_Eric_: Hi Toby and Daniel, linear least squares is what you think it is and is what is on Wikipedia. I didn't say what I wanted to say very clearly. And now I see I didn't read Daniel's question very carefully either. It's the hazards of not having more than 5 minute spurts to pay attention to this stuff :O What I meant to say is that my thoughts about the relationship between linear least squares and Kan extension (which are nothing more than a gut feeling) were related to what John said and _not_ about anything I read on Wikipedia. I didn't mean to suggest that what Wikipedia said was not related or relevant. Of course it is. It was just a comment about what made me think of the idea. Sorry about that.

In my work, we often have a bunch of time series representing prices of financial securities. We also have time series of financial/economic factors and we try to explain the prices in terms of factors. There are not enough factors to find a true "inverse", but we do "the best we can". That spirit of doing "the best we can" sounded very close to what John was describing. That's all I was trying to say.

_Eric_: Here's how I think of it (which may be completely misguided). Given $F:C\to D$ and $p:C\to C'$, and an expression (in the linear case)

$$F = F'\circ p + \epsilon.$$

We want to find $F':C'\to D$ that minimizes $\epsilon$.

Question: How could you express this in a more general category-theoretic way?

_Toby_:  OK, maybe I have a better idea what you mean now.  In particular, just as there are left and right Kan extensions, there are really also two kinds of linear least squares.  Looking at [this picture from Wikipedia](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Linear_least_squares_example2.png) for reference, instead of minimising the (squares of the) lengths of the *vertical* lines marked, we could just as easily minimise the (squares of the) lengths of corresponding *horizontal* lines.  It is a (sometimes rather arbitrary) distinction between dependent and independent variable that tells us which to use.

Also, looking at your example at [[functor]], it occurs to me that at some point you\'ll have to deal with the fact that linear least squares doesn\'t happen in [[Vect]]; it happens in [[Hilb]] (or at least in [[Ban]]).  That is, to minimise $\epsilon$, you\'ve got to be able to measure the size (norm) of $\epsilon$.  And that\'s where all of those transpose matrices in formulas for linear least squares get in.

Anyway, I wouldn\'t rule out a priori the idea that linear least squares might be given by a Kan extension, but I\'m not seeing it yet myself.  But at least I see what is the analogy that is exciting you.


category: reference