* N. Popescu, __Abelian categories with applications to rings and modules__, London Mathematical Society Monographs 3, Academic Press 1973, xii + 470 pp

Contents:

__Note to the reader__

Some terminology, notations and conventions used throughout the book.

__Categories and functors__ 

The notion of a category; examples. Special objects and morphisms. Functors. Inductive and
projective limits. Adjoint functors; equivalence of categories.

__Abelian categories__

Preadditive and additive category. The canonical factorization of a morphism; preabelian categories.
Abelian categories. Fibred products and fibred sums. Basic lemmas on abelian categories. The
isomorphism theorems. Direct sums of subobjects. Inductive limits; the conditions Ab.

__Additive functors__

Additive functors. Exactness of functors; injective and projective objects. The injective and
projective objects in the category Ab. Categories of additive functors; modules. Special objects in
abelian categories. Tensor products; a characterization of functor categories. Tensor products of
modules. Flat modules. Some remarks on projective modules. Injective envelopes. Semisimple
rings.

__Localization__

Categories of fractions; calculus of fractions. The spectral category of an abelian category. The
quotient category of an abelian category relative to a dense subcategory. The section functor.
Localization in categories with injective envelopes. Localization in Ab 3 categories. Sheaves over a
topological space. Torsion theories. Localizing subcategories in categories of modules. Localization
in categories of modules. Left exact functors; the embedding theorem. The study of the localization
ring of a ring. The complete ring of quotients. Some remarks on Grothendieck categories.
Finiteness conditions on localizing systems. Flat epimorphism of rings. Left quasi-orders of a ring.
Rings of fractions. Left orders. Left spectrum of a ring. Bilocalizing subcategories.

__The Krull-Remak-Schmidt theorem and decomposition theories__

The classical Krull-Remak-Schmidt theorem. The structure of spectral categories. Local
coirreducible categories. Decomposition theory. Semi-noetherian categories. Semi-artinian
categories. Noetherian and artinian categories. Locally noetherian categories. Noetherian and
artinian rings. Primary decomposition theory. Decomposition theories on locally noetherian categories. 

__Duality__

Linearly compact subcategories. Topologically linearly compact rings. The duality theorem for
Grothendieck categories. Duality theory for l.n.- and l.f.-categories. Colocalization.

__Bibliography__

__Index__