#Idea#

The **fundamental groupoid** of a space $X$ is a [[groupoid]] whose objects are the points of $X$ and whose morphisms are paths in $X$, identified up to endpoint-preserving [[homotopy]].

#Definition#



The **fundamental groupoid** $\pi_1(X)$ of a topological space  $X$ is the [[groupoid]] whose set of objects is $X$ and whose morphism from $x$ to $y$ are the homotopy-classes $[\gamma]$ of continuous maps $\gamma : [0,1] \to X$ whose endpoints map to $x$ and $y$ (which the homotopies are required to fix). Composition is by concatenation of representative maps. Under the [[homotopy]]-[[equivalence relation]] this becomes an associative and unital composition with respect to which every morphism has an inverse.


#Remarks#

* For any $x$ in $X$ the first homotopy group $\pi_1(X,x)$ of $X$ based at $X$ arises as the [[automorphism group]] of $x$ in $\Pi_1(X)$:
$$
  \pi_1(X,x) = Aut_{\Pi_1(X)}(x)
  \,.
$$
So the fundamental groupoid is an improvement on the idea of the fundamental group, which gets rid of the choice of basepoint.

* An improvement on this relevant to the [[van Kampen theorem]] for computing the fundamental group or groupoid is to take $\pi_1(X,A)$, namely the full subgroupoid of $\pi_1(X)$ on a set $A$ of base points, chosen according to the geometry at hand. Thus if $X$ is the union of two open sets $U,V$ with intersection $W$ then we can take $A$ large enough to meet each path-component of $U,V,W$. If $X$ has an action of a group $G$ then $G$ acts on $\pi_1(X,A)$ if $A$ is a union of orbits of the action.  

* In parts of the literature the fundamental groupoid and in particular the [[fundamental infinity-groupoid]] of a space is called the **Poincaré-groupoid**.

* The fundamental groupoid and its higher generalization play a fundamental role in the definition of [[Trimble n-category]].

* Following Trimble's definition, it is possible to generalize the notion of fundamental $n$-groupoids from [[Top]] to other [[closed monoidal homotopical category|closed monoidal homotopical categories]] using the concept of categories with [[interval object]].

* There are  constructions of strict fundamental $\omega$-groupoids  of various types (globular, simplicial, cubical) for a filtered space, and more complicated fundamental [[cat-n-group]] of an $n$-cube of pointed spaces. For the former see the references in 

R. Brown, A new higher homotopy groupoid: the fundamental  globular $\omega$-groupoid of a filtered space, Homotopy, Homology and Applications, 10 (2008), No. 1, pp.327-343.

For the latter, see 

R. Brown and J.-L. Loday, Van Kampen theorems for diagrams of spaces,  Topology 26 (1987) 311-334.

In both cases, the structures are strict and the functors satisfy a van Kampen type theorem, i.e. preserve certain colimits, so that one can do some calculation, in many cases of a nonabelian type. 