
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Measure and probability theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include measure theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Measurable spaces
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

Measurable spaces are a necessary prelude to the general theory of measure and [[integration]].  Basically, a measure is a recipe for computing the size --- e.g. length, area, volume --- of subsets of a given set $X$.  The structure of a 'measurable space' picks out those subsets of $X$ for which the size is well-defined.   These subsets are called 'measurable'.   A 'measure' on $X$ is then a recipe that assigns a number to each measurable subset saying how big it is.  

In short: you get a [[measure space]] by placing a measure on a measurable space.

Ideally, all subsets would be measurable, but this contradicts the [[axiom of choice]] for the basic example of [[Lebesgue measure]] on the [[real line]].  Although it is possible to use nonstandard [[foundations]] of mathematics in which all subsets of the real line are Lebesgue measurable, any general theory that includes that example and is more general than those foundations requires some notion of measurable space.

In any case, measurable spaces are of some interest in their own right, even without a measure on them.


## Definitions

We assume the law of [[excluded middle]]; see below for the constructive theory.

Given a [[set]] $X$, a __$\sigma$-[[sigma-algebra|algebra]]__ is a collection of [[subsets]] of $X$ that is closed under [[complement|complementation]], [[countable set|countable]] [[unions]], and countable [[intersections]].  A __measurable space__, by the usual modern definition, is a set $X$ equipped with a $\sigma$-algebra $\Sigma$.  The elements of $\Sigma$ are called the __measurable subsets__ of $X$ (or more properly, the measurable sets of $(X,\Sigma)$).

Historically, people have used more general notions that $\sigma$-algebras, such as $\delta$-rings and similar concepts whose names you can probably now guess; these are discussed at [[sigma-algebra]].


### Measurable functions

Given measurable spaces $X$ and $Y$, a __measurable function__ from $X$ to $Y$ is a [[function]] $f: X \to Y$ such that the [[preimage]] $f^*(T)$ is measurable in $X$ whenever $T$ is measurable in $Y$.  Measurable spaces and measurable functions form a [[category]] $Measble$, which is [[topological concrete category|topological]] over [[Set]].

In classical measure theory, it is usually assumed that $Y$ is the [[real line]] (or a variation such as the extended real line or the complex plane) equipped with the [[Borel sets]] (see the examples below).  Then $f$ is measurable if and only if $f^{-1}(I)$ is measurable whenever $I \subseteq Y$ is an interval.

In some variations of measure theory based on $\delta$&#x2011; or $\sigma$-rings instead of on $\sigma$-algebras, it is necessary to allow [[partial functions]] whose domain is a [[relatively measurable set]].  Classically (when $Y$ is the real line), one achieves (for purposes of [[integration]]) essentially the same result by requiring only that $f^{-1}(I)$ be measurable whenever $I \subseteq Y$ is an interval that does not contain $0$; in other words, one effectively assumes that $f$ is zero wherever it would otherwise be undefined.


## Examples

*  Of course, the [[power set]] of $X$ is closed under all operations, so it is a $\sigma$-algebra.  Thus every set becomes a __[[discrete space|discrete]] measurable space__.


*  If $X$ is a [[topological space]], then the $\sigma$-algebra generated by the open sets (or equivalently, by the closed sets) in $X$ is the __Borel $\sigma$-algebra__; its elements are called the __[[Borel sets]]__ of $X$. In particular, the Borel sets of [[real number]]s are the Borel sets in the [[real line]] with its usual topology.


*  If a measurable space $(X,\Sigma)$ is equipped with a measure $\mu$, making it into a [[measure space]], then the sets of measure zero form a $\sigma$-[[sigma-ideal|ideal]] of $\Sigma$ (that is an [[ideal]] that is also a sub-$\sigma$-ring).  Let a __[[null subset|null set]]__ be *any* set (measurable or not) contained in a set of measure zero; then the null sets form a $\sigma$-ideal in the [[power set]] of $X$.  Call a set __$\mu$-measurable__ if it is the union of a measurable set and a null set; then the $\mu$-measurable sets form a $\sigma$-algebra $\Sigma_\mu$ called the __completion__ of $\Sigma$ under $\mu$, and the measurable space $(X,\Sigma_\mu)$ is the __completion__ of $(X,\Sigma)$.

*  In particular, the __Lebesgue-measurable__ sets in the real line are the elements of the completion of the Borel $\sigma$-algebra under [[Lebesgue measure]].


## Properties

### Relation to von Neumann algebras

One version of the [[Gelfand-Naimark theorem|Gel’fand–Naimark theorem]] states that the category of [[commutative algebra|commutative]] $W^*$-[[W*-algebra|algebras]] is [[dual equivalence|dual]] to the category of *localisable* measurable spaces.  (As such, arbitrary $W^*$-algebras may be interpreted as 'noncommutative' measurable spaces in a sense analogous to [[noncommutative geometry]].)

To make this work correctly, we cannot simply define localisability as a [[property]] of measurable spaces; instead, a __localisable measurable space__ is a measurable space (a set $X$ with a $\sigma$-algebra $\Sigma$) with a $\sigma$-[[sigma-ideal|ideal]] $\mathcal{N}$ of $\Sigma$ and $\mathcal{P}X$ simultaneously (called the ideal of __[[null sets]]__) such that $\Sigma/\mathcal{N}$ is a [[complete lattice]]; and a [[morphism]] of localisable measurable spaces is a measurable function, with the property that the [[preimage]] of any null set is null, up to an [[equivalence relation]] where $f \cong g$ if $\{ x \;|\; f(x) \neq g(x) \}$ is a null set.

The requirement that $\Sigma/\mathcal{N}$ be complete is the real localisability condition here; the trick of equipping a measurable space with a $\sigma$-ideal of null sets (or equivalently a $\sigma$-[[filter]] of [[full sets]]) and taking measurable functions only up to equivalence is a common one in other situations.

Localisable measurable spaces can also be studied via the lattice $\Sigma/\mathcal{N}$, which is a [[frame]]; the morphisms correspond to certain [[continuous maps]] between [[locales]], and thus we are studying locales with [[extra structure]], called __[[measurable locales]]__.


## In alternative foundations

While Lebesgue measure on $\mathbb{R}^n$ can be done in very weak [[foundations]], a general theory of measure and measurable spaces seems to require powerful [[set theory|set-theoretic]] machinery.  Indeed, not much seems to be possible in [[predicative mathematics|predicative]] contexts, and the (nonpredicative) [[constructive mathematics|constructive]] theory is noticeably more complicated than the classical theory.  On the other hand, the classical theory has its own complications, with nonmeasurable sets and functions that can be proved to exist but which seem to never arise in practice.  Instead, there are classically false but apparently consistent foundations in which measure theory is extremely simple.


### Predicative theory
{#Predicative}

The main problem for measure theory in [[predicative mathematics]] is getting your hands on a $\sigma$-algebra.  Once you\'ve got that, you\'ve got a measurable space (obviously) and go on to [[measure space]], where there are no new difficulties.  However, what is (say) a Borel set in the real line?  This is difficult, if not impossible, to explain predicatively.  (In the case of [[Lebesgue measure]], there *are* ways to describe the Lebesgue-measurable sets predicatively, but these do not seem to generalise to a broader theory.)

Note that there is no real problem in describing what, say, an open set is.  Not only can this be done for the real line in the usual $\epsilon$-$\delta$ way, but it is easy to take *any* collection of subsets of any set $X$, call that collection a [[subbase]], and describe which sets are the open sets in the [[topological space|topology]] generated by that subbase.  The reason is that there are only two steps in moving from a subbase to a topology, and while the latter step is too impredicative to allow one to speak of the *set* of all open sets, it\'s OK if you only want to talk about *individual* open sets.  (To be explicit: given a collection $B$ to be used as subbase, a set $G$ is _open_ if, for every point $x$, if $x \in G$, then there exist a [[natural number]] $n$ and elements $A_1, \ldots, A_n$ of $B$ such that $x \in A_i$ for each $i$ and, for every point $y$, if $y \in A_i$ for each $i$, then $y \in G$.  Since we quantify only over points and natural numbers, not over sets or functions, this is a predicative definition, and it\'s easy to prove that the open sets satisfy the axioms of a topology.)

This cannot be done with $\sigma$-algebras, since we need uncountably many sets.  To be sure, each individual step is predicative, and we can freely talk about $G_\delta$ sets and the like, but to define a Borel set we need to quantify over all countable ordinals.  While it is possible to hypothesise the existence of an uncountable ordinal $\omega_1$ and be predicative 'over' $\omega_1$ (and after all, everything else in this section is only predicative over the first infinite ordinal $\omega_0$, which we only have if we accept an [[axiom of infinity]]), this cannot be constructed predicatively.  (The immediate definition of $\omega_1$ as the [[Hartog's number]] of $\omega_0$ uses [[power set]]s; while the construction of an uncountable ordinal by applying the [[well-ordering theorem]] to the [[function set]] $\mathbf{N}^{\mathbf{N}}$ doesn\'t seem to use reasoning that requires the existence of power sets as long as you don\'t also throw in [[excluded middle]], it does use reasoning that is not accepted by any predicative school that I know.)

So as far as I ([[Toby Bartels]]) can tell, there is no general predicative theory of measurable spaces, only an ad hoc theory of Lebsegue measurability.  I would be delighted to learn otherwise!


### Constructive theory

From a constructive perspective, there are a couple of related problems with the classical theory.  One is that the notion of $\sigma$-algebra is highly suspicious, because it relies on an operation, [[complement]]ation, that behaves very differently in the [[intuitionistic logic]] that [[constructive mathematics]] uses.  The other is that, even you acept the definition of $\sigma$-algebra anyway (after all, the Lebesgue-measurable sets on the real line do still form one), there may be very few measurable functions.

Indeed, if we set aside the general theory of measurable spaces and simply do Lebesgue measure ad hoc in a constructive (even predicative) way, we find that instead of measurable [[function]]s we really want measurable [[partial function]]s whose domain of definition is a full set.  (A full set is a measurable set whose intersection with any set of measure $x$ also has measure $x$; classically, a set is full if and only if its complement is a null set.)  This suggests that if we want to define the concept of measurable function, then we have to know what the full sets are, which requires knowing at least something about the measure ---and yet we\'re only supposed to be talking about a measure*able* space!  (This is related to the complication in the definition of localisable measurable space above.)

There is a way out, due to Henry Cheng, for both of these problems at once.  Instead of dealing with individual sets, we will deal with pairs of [[disjoint set]]s.  The intuition is that we use disjoint pairs $(A,B)$ such that $A \cup B$ is full ---with $(A,\neg{A})$ being the motivating example in the classical theory---, but we let the $\sigma$-algebra itself tell us which pairs those are.  Once we fix a particular measure, we may find additional pairs whose union is full, somewhat like finding additional measurable sets when taking the completion in the classical theory (although taking the completion is a separate phenomenon here), but that\'s all right; the important thing is that each pair chosen really is full in any measure used (much as each set in a classical $\sigma$-algebra must actually be measurable by any measure used).

+-- {: .standout}
Some of the [[abstract nonsense]] below is original research, but based heavily on Cheng\'s example.
=--


#### The Boolean semi-algebra of disjoint pairs

Given a set $X$, a __disjoint pair__ in $X$ is a pair $(A,B)$ of [[subset]]s of $X$ such that $A \cap B$ is [[empty set|empty]].  Every set $A$ defines a disjoint pair $[A] = (A,\neg{A})$, but many disjoint pairs are not of this form; the extreme counterexample is $(\empty,\empty)$.  We order disjoint pairs by the usual order on the first component and the opposite on the second:
$$ (A,B) \subseteq (C,D) \;\Leftrightarrow\; A \subseteq C \;\wedge\; B \supseteq D .$$
Similarly, we make the usual operations on sets into operations on disjoint pairs by applying formal [[de Morgan duality]] to the second component:

*  $ \empty = [\empty] = (\empty, X) $;
*  $ X = [X] = (X, \empty) $;
*  $ (A,B) \cup (C,D) = (A \cup C, B \cap D) $;
*  $ (A,B) \cap (C,D) = (A \cap C, B \cup D) $;
*  $ \bigcup_i (A_i,B_i) = (\bigcup_i A_i, \bigcap_i B_i) $;
*  $ \bigcap_i (A_i,B_i) = (\bigcap_i A_i, \bigcup_i B_i) $.

(Note that we do not write $[A]$ as $A$ except when $A$ is given as $\empty$ or $X$, because for example, $[A \cap B] = [A] \cap [B]$, while classically valid, may fail constructively.)

These operations form the disjoint pairs into a [[lattice]]; in fact, it is both a [[complete lattice]] and a [[distributive lattice]], but it is not constructively completely distributive in either direction.  (Compare the fact that a power set is, constructively, completely distributive only in one direction, making it a [[frame]]; here the directions are mixed by the formal duality and so neither works.  On the other hand, that the power set is a frame is used to show that the infinitary operations do define disjoint pairs.)

Finally, we define the complement of $(A,B)$, not using the complements of $A$ and $B$ (which may not even be disjoint) but instead simply by reversing them:
$$ \neg(A,B) = (B,A) .$$
Then an actual [[de Morgan duality]] holds for these operations:

*  $ \neg\bigcup_i (A_i,B_i) = \bigcap_i \neg(A_i,B_i) $;
*  $ \neg\bigcap_i (A_i,B_i) = \bigcup_i \neg(A_i,B_i) $;
*  $ \neg\neg(A,B) = (A,B) $, the famous [[double negation]] law.

We can go on to define relative complement $(A,B) \setminus (C,D)$ and symmetric difference $(A,B) \uplus (C,D)$ in terms of complement, intersection, and union as usual, and they obey many of the usual classical laws.  (For instance, $\uplus$ is ---through a fairly lengthy calculation--- associative, which is not constructively true of [[symmetric difference]] on a power set.)

At this point, the reader could be forgiven for thinking that we have cleverly pulled a [[Boolean algebra]] out of a mere [[Heyting algebra]], but this is not true; aside from the give-away that this lattice is not constructively completely distributive, it is not even classically a Boolean algebra.  This is because $(A,B) \cup \neg(A,B) = (A \cup B, \empty)$ (and similarly for intersection) and there is no requirement that $A \cup B = X$.  What we have instead is a complete Boolean [[rig]], aka semi-ring with unit; to keep consistent with previous terminology, I\'ll call such a thing a __[[Boolean semi-algebra]]__.

As [[Todd Trimble]] pointed out, this is a special case of the [[Chu construction]]; the poset of disjoint pairs in $X$ is $Chu_{TV}(P X, \empty)$, where $TV$ is the [[enriched category|enriching]] category of [[truth value]]s.


#### The $\sigma$-semi-algebra of complemented pairs

Given a set $X$, a __$\sigma$-semi-algebra__ on $X$ is a collection $\Sigma$ of disjoint pairs in $X$, called the __complemented pairs__ of $\Sigma$, such that:
1.  $[\empty] = (\empty,X)$ is a complemented pair;
1.  If $(A,B)$ is a complemented pair, then so is its complement $(B,A)$;
1.  If $(A_1,B_1), (A_2,B_2), (A_3,B_3), \ldots$ are complemented pairs, then so is their union $(\bigcup_i A_i, \bigcap_i B_i)$.

The arguments above that $\Sigma$ is closed under countable intersections, relative complements, and symmetric differences goes through.  (We can also define analogous notions of semi-algebra, $\delta$-semi-ring, and the rest.)

Of course, a __Cheng measurable space__ (we don\'t really want 'semi-' here) is a set equipped with a $\sigma$-semi-algebra.

Incidentally, the reason why we do not use the term 'measurable pair' is that $A$ and $B$ may easily both be measurable in some sense yet without having $(A,B)$ as a complemented pair.  In particular, $(\empty,\empty)$ is rarely a complemented pair (although that is not forbidden either), yet it is hard to call it non-measurable.


#### Measurable functions

Given two Cheng measurable spaces $X$ and $Y$, an __almost function__ from $X$ to $Y$ is a [[partial function]] from $X$ to $Y$ such that, for some complemented pair $(A,B)$, the domain of $f$ contains $A \cup B$.  A __measurable function__ from $X$ to $Y$ is a partial function from $X$ to $Y$ such that, given any complemented pair $(C,D)$ in $Y$, the pair $(f^*(C),f^*(D))$ of [[preimage]]s is a complemented pair.  (By trying $(C,D) = (X,\empty)$, we see that a measurable function is an almost function, but the converse need not hold.)

Cheng measurable spaces and measurable functions between them form a [[topological concrete category]]. 


### In dream mathematics

While measure theory only gets more complicated in constructive mathematics, it becomes much easier in [[dream mathematics]].

... more coming ...


## References

For Cheng\'s theory of measure spaces, see the 1985 edition of Bishop & Bridges, _Constructive Analysis_.  (And the references therein, obviously, but I haven\'t read those.)

A discussion of the abstract properties of the category of localizable measurable spaces is in 

* Alain Guichardet, _Sur la catégorie des algèbres de von Neumann_  (French) Bull. Sci. Math. (2) 90 1966 41–64. ([MSN](http://ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=201989))

A useful series of expositions along these lines is in

* [[Dmitri Pavlov]], _On measurable spaces_

  * [MO comment 1](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/20740/is-there-an-introduction-to-probability-theory-from-a-structuralist-categorical-p/20820#20820)

  * [MO comment 2](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/49426/is-there-a-category-structure-one-can-place-on-measure-spaces-so-that-category-th/49542#49542)


## Revision plan

1.  Move [[Cheng measurable space]] to its own page, and perhaps put other variations there.

2.  Describe several variations of definition:
    *  with a filter of full sets,
    *  localisable,
    *  Cheng,
    *  from a delta-ring etc,
    *  localic,
    *  finitary,
    *  noncommutative.

3.  Do measurable functions only afterwards, stressing almost-everywhere equality.  Describe the relevant categories.

4.  Mention measure spaces and anything else.


[[!redirects measurable space]]
[[!redirects measurable spaces]]

[[!redirects measurable set]]
[[!redirects measurable sets]]
[[!redirects measurable subset]]
[[!redirects measurable subsets]]

[[!redirects measurable function]]
[[!redirects measurable functions]]

[[!redirects localizable measurable space]]
[[!redirects localizable measurable spaces]]
[[!redirects localisable measurable space]]
[[!redirects localisable measurable spaces]]

[[!redirects Cheng measurable space]]
[[!redirects Cheng measurable spaces]]

[[!redirects completion of a measurable space]]
[[!redirects completions of a measurable space]]
[[!redirects completions of measurable spaces]]
