pages/16555.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Higher algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea

The notion of _enriched Lawvere theory_ is a generalization of Lawvere theories to the setting of [[enriched categories]].

## Definitions and elementary properties

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition

An **enriched [[Lawvere theory]]** over a [[locally finitely presentable]] $V$-[[enriched category]] $A$ is a small $V$-[[enriched category]] $L$ together with a $V$-[[enriched functor]] $J\colon A_f^{op}\to L$
that induces an identity map on the set of objects.
Here $A_f$ denotes the [[full subcategory]] of [[finitely presentable objects]] in $A$.
The category $V$ is a locally finitely presentable [[closed symmetric monoidal category]].

=--

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition

An **algebra** over an enriched Lawvere theory is
an object $X$ in $A$ equipped with a functor $M\colon L\to V$ whose precomposition with $J$ is isomorphic to the representable functor of $X$.

=--

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Proposition

For the case $A=Set$ the above definition recovers
the usual notion of a [[Lawvere theory]]
and an [[algebra]] over a Lawvere theory.

=--

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Proposition

The forgetful functor from algebras to $A$
is a [[finitary enriched monadic functor]] (over $V$).

=--

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Proposition

The category of enriched Lawvere theories over $A$
is equivalent to the category of [[finitary enriched
monads]] over $A$.
The corresponding $V$-enriched categories of
algebras are also equivalent.

=--

## References

[[Koki Nishizawa]], [[John Power]].
_Lawvere theories enriched over a general base_. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra **213**, Issue 3, March 2009, Pages 377--386.
MR2477057, Zbl:1158.18003,
doi:[10.1016/j.jpaa.2008.07.009](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpaa.2008.07.009).

Commit message:

Revision ID: 104789 Revision date: 2016-01-28 13:19:59 Page name: enriched Lawvere theory Author: Dmitri Pavlov IP address: 132.199.103.47

pages/16555.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Higher algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea

The notion of _enriched Lawvere theory_ is a generalization of Lawvere theories to the setting of [[enriched categories]].

## Definitions and elementary properties

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition

An **enriched [[Lawvere theory]]** over a [[locally finitely presentable]] $V$-[[enriched category]] $A$ is a small $V$-[[enriched category]] $L$ together with a $V$-[[enriched functor]] $J\colon A_f^{op}\to L$
that induces an identity map on the set of objects.
Here $A_f$ denotes the [[full subcategory]] of [[finitely presentable objects]] in $A$.
The category $V$ is a locally finitely presentable [[closed symmetric monoidal category]].

=--

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition

An **algebra** over an enriched Lawvere theory is
an object $X$ in $A$ equipped with a functor $M\colon L\to V$ whose precomposition with $J$ is isomorphic to the representable functor of $X$.

=--

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Proposition

For the case $A=Set$ the above definition recovers
the usual notion of a [[Lawvere theory]]
and an [[algebra]] over a Lawvere theory.

=--

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Proposition

The forgetful functor from algebras to $A$
is a [[finitary enriched monadic functor]] (over $V$).

=--

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Proposition

The category of enriched Lawvere theories over $A$
is equivalent to the category of [[finitary enriched
monads]] over $A$.
The corresponding $V$-enriched categories of
algebras are also equivalent.

=--

## References

[[Koki Nishizawa]], [[John Power]].
_Lawvere theories enriched over a general base_. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra **213**, Issue 3, March 2009, Pages 377--386.
MR2477057, Zbl:1158.18003,
doi:[10.1016/j.jpaa.2008.07.009](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpaa.2008.07.009).

Rory B. B. Lucyshyn-Wright.
_Enriched algebraic theories and monads for a system of arities_.
[arXiv:1511.02920v2](http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.02920v2).
