A **topological vector space**, or **TVS** for short, is a [[vector space]] $X$ (usually over the [[field]] $k = \mathbb{R}$ or $k = \mathbb{C}$) equipped with a [[topological space|topology]] for which the addition and scalar multiplication maps 
$$+: X \times X \to X, \qquad \cdot: k \times X \to X$$ 
are continuous (where $k$ is given its standard topology).

Much as a [[topological group]] is a [[group object]] in [[Top]], so a TVS is a vector space [[internalization|internal to]] $Top$ ... *but* not just any vector space in $Top$ is a TVS!  The reason is that, in a vector space internal to $Top$, $\cdot$ only need be continuous in the second variable; in other words, this concept uses the [[discrete topology]] on $k$.  So only some vector spaces in $Top$ are TVSes.

Like any topological [[abelian group]], TVS $X$ carries a [[uniform space]] structure generated by a basis of entourages that correspond to neighborhoods $U$ of $0$: 

$$\{(u, v)\in X \times X\,|\,u-v\in U\}.$$ 

+--{.query}
What the heck is entourage ? I found the word incomprehensible, hence useless. P.S. Aha founded the terminology under [[uniform space]]. Maybe one should create an entry for that (and include alternative words to the French one). Russian word okruzhenie (I learend uniform spaces only from the Russian edition of Engelking)
would be in English something like encircling (etimologically) or environment (in other usages). I am not familiar with the standard in English. For the basis you quote Engelking seems to say "a basis for the unformity" --Zoran
=--

Thus many uniform space notions (uniform continuity, completeness, etc.) carry over to the TVS context. Also from the uniformity (although it is also easy to prove directly), it follows that a TVS is completely regular, and also Hausdorff if and only if it is $T_0$. Most authors insist on the $T_0$ condition to rule out degenerate cases, but that prevents the category of TVSes from being [[topological concrete category|topological]] over [[Vect]].
If the TVS $V$ is not Hausdorff, then the subset $V_0$ defined as the intersection of all neighborhoods of zero is a vector subspace of $V$ and the quotient vector space $V/V_0$ is Hausdorff, hence Tihonov (= completely regular). 

The condition that scalar multiplication is continuous puts significant constraints on the topology of $X$. For example, [[locally compact space|local compactness]] of $k$ implies, when $V$ is Hausdorff, that for any non-zero 
$v \in X$ the function $-\cdot v: k \to V$ maps $k$ 
[[homeomorphism|homeomorphically]] onto its image. It follows quickly that $X$ cannot (for instance) be [[compact space|compact]] (unless it is the zero space and so has no non-zero $v$); a classical theorem along these lines is that $V$ can be locally compact Hausdorff if and only if $V$ is finite-dimensional. (In the non-Hausdorff case, the theorems are that $X$ is compact if and only if its topology is indiscrete and that $X$ is locally compact if and only if it is a finitary [[direct sum]] of indiscrete spaces.) On the other hand, a nice property of even infinite-dimensional TVSes is that they are [[path-connected space|path-connected]]. 

More classical material should be added, particularly on [[locally convex spaces]].