# Extension systems

* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

An *extension system* is a way of presenting a [[monad]] that doesn't involve iteration of the underlying endofunctor.  This is simpler for certain purposes, and the operations involved are more basic to some applications such as [[monads in computer science]].

## Definition

An **extension system** on a category $C$ consists of

* For every object $A\in C$, an object $T A\in C$ and a morphism $\eta_A : A\to T A$, and

* For every morphism $f:B\to T A$ in $C$, a morphism $f^T:T B \to T A$, satisfying the axioms

* For every $A$ we have $(\eta_A)^T = 1_{T A}$,

* For every $f:B\to T A$, we have $f^T \circ \eta_B = f$, and

* For every $f:B\to T A$ and $g:C \to T B$, we have $f^T \circ g^T = (f^T \circ g)^T$.

Given these data, we make $T$ a functor by $T f = (\eta_A \circ f)^T$, we define multiplication maps $\mu_A:T T A \to T A$ as $(1_{T A})^T$, and we verify that the result is a [[monad]].  Conversely, given a monad $(T,\eta,\mu)$, we define $f^T = \mu_A \circ T f$ and check the above axioms.  Thus, extension systems are equivalent to monads.

### The Kleisli category

This presentation of a monad is especially convenient for defining the [[Kleisli category]] $C_T$: its objects are those of $C$, its morphisms $B\to A$ are the morphisms $B\to T A$ in $C$, and the composite of $f:B\to T A$ with $g:C \to T B$ is $f^T \circ g$.

### The category of algebras

It is also possible to define [[algebras over a monad]] using this presentation.  A $T$-algebra consists of

* An object $B$, and

* For every morphism $h:X\to B$, a morphism $h^B : T X \to B$, such that

* For every $h:X\to B$ we have $h^B \circ \eta_X = h$, and

* For every $h:X\to B$ and $y:Y\to T X$ we have $h^B \circ y^T = (h^B \circ y)^B$.

### Strong monads

When $C$ is a [[cartesian closed category]], to make $T$ a [[strong monad]] we simply have to enhance the extension operation $(-)^T$ to an internal morphism $(T A)^B \to (T A)^{T B}$, or equivalently $T B \times (T A)^B \to T A$.  This morphism is known as "bind" in use of [[monads in computer science]].

## References

The above definitions are from

* F. Marmolejo and R. J. Wood, *Monads as extension systems -- no iteration is necessary*, [TAC](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/24/4/24-04abs.html) 2010.

but the definition of monad as extension system appeared in 

* E. G. Manes. *Algebraic Theories*. Springer-Verlag, 1976.

and this definition and also the definition of algebras by an extension operation appeared in 

* R.F.C. Walters, *A categorical approach to universal algebra*, Ph.D. Thesis, 1970.

See also

* F. Marmolejo and R. J. Wood, *Kan extensions and lax idempotent pseudomonads*, [TAC](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/26/1/26-01abs.html) 2012

* F. Marmolejo and R. J. Wood, *No-iteration pseudomonads*, [TAC](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/28/14/28-14abs.html) 2013

The definition of monad as an extension system was used by [[Eugenio Moggi]] in his original paper introducing the application of [[monads in computer science]] for modeling different notions of computation:

* [[Eugenio Moggi]], _Notions of computation and monads_, Information And Computation, 93(1), 1991. ([pdf](http://www.disi.unige.it/person/MoggiE/ftp/ic91.pdf))

This way of presenting a monad is also closely related to [[continuation-passing style]], as described in

* [[Andrzej Filinski]], _Representing Monads_, POPL 1994. ([pdf](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.43.8213&rep=rep1&type=pdf))

[[!redirects extension systems]]