In [[propositional logic]], the __exclusive disjunction__ (also called __exclusive or__ or simply __xor__) of a family of statements ([[truth value]]s, propositions, predicates, velc) is a statement that is true if and only if exactly one of the statements in the family is true.  The corresponding on operation on [[subset]]s (of a fixed set) or [[pure set]]s is called __symmetric difference__.


## Definitions

The __exclusive disjunction__ of $p$ and $q$, written $p &#x22BB; q$ (and a host of other ways), may be defined in any of these forms:
1.  $\neg(p \Leftrightarrow q)$,
2.  $(p \vee q) \wedge \neg(p \wedge q)$,
3.  $(p \wedge \neg{q}) \vee (\neg{p} \wedge q)$.

These are all equivalent in [[classical logic]].  In [[intuitionistic logic]], (2,3) are equivalent but (1) is weaker; (2,3) give the usual meaning in [[constructive mathematics]].

The false statement is the [[identity element|identity]] for this operation; it is the exclusive disjunction of no statements.

In classical logic (but not in intuitionistic logic), this operation is associative, but multiple applications don\'t mean what you may think.  Instead, $(p &#x22BB; q) &#x22BB; \equiv p &#x22BB; (q &#x22BB; r)$ comes out true if $p, q, r$ are all true; in general,
$$ (p_1 &#x22BB; (p_2 &#x22BB; \cdots &#x22BB; p_n)\cdots) $$
is true if and only if an *odd* number of the statements $p_i$ is true.  But when we write a multiple statement with 'xor', we really mean that *exactly one* of the statements is true.  So by fiat, define the __exclusive disjunction__
$$ p_1 &#x22BB; p_2 &#x22BB; \cdots &#x22BB; p_n $$
(without parentheses) to mean that exactly one of the $p_i$ is true.

As the indexed version of ordinary [[disjunction]] is [[existential quantification]] $\exists$, so the indexed version of exclusive disjunction is [[uniqueness quantification]] $\exists!$; this requires a primitive notion of [[equality]] to state in [[predicate logic]].

Similarly, the __exclusive union__ of two sets $A$ and $B$, written $A \uplus B$ (and a host of other ways), may be defined using exclusive disjunction:
$$ A \uplus B = \{ x \;|\; x \in A \;&#x22BB;\; x \in B \} .$$
The __exclusive union__ of a family $(A_i)_{i: I}$ of sets may be defined using uniqueness quantification:
$$ \biguplus_i A_i = \{ x \;|\; \exists!{i},\; x \in A_i \} .$$

Compare this with the internal [[disjoint union]]; the [[union]], exclusive union, and disjoint union of a family of (pairwise) [[disjoint set]]s are all the same.  For a family that is not disjoint, however, the union, exclusive union, and external disjoint union are different, while the internal disjoint union does not even exist.

We also have the __symmetric difference__ of two sets, which is the same as the exclusive union.  But we see this operation as the addition in a [[Boolean ring]] and so actually interpret it in the usual way as an associative operation.  So the symmetric difference of $n$ sets indeed consists of those points that belong to an *odd* number of sets; there is no infinitary symmetric difference.

+--{.query} 
[[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: Just how strong is the convention that the uniqueness quantification formula for $\biguplus$ be pronounced "symmetric difference"? While I can see a need for this operation, it's almost asking for trouble to call it this around mathematicians who clearly perceive that the binary symmetric difference corresponds to addition in a Boolean ring, and who would thus "naturally" extend the meaning of n-ary symmetric difference so as to coincide with n-ary addition. 

If this convention really is widely adopted, then I'll let the matter drop. But if it's not, then I don't favor its adoption here. I'd sooner call it "exclusive union" [or something similar], and keep "symmetric difference" around as a technical term for the general addition -- it's such a handy operation that it deserves a good name. 

_Toby_:  That\'s a good argument, and I have no contrary references.  (The best that I have is to use 'symmetric difference' for two, then later state the generalisation to many as above, but without actually calling that anything other than using the same symbol.)  So I\'ll go along with your 'exclusive union'.

_Todd_: Okay, thanks. I'll remove this discussion in a little while. 

_Toby_:  Now I feel like [[symmetric difference]] (which currently redirects here) should go somewhere else ---which is ironic, since I created this page primarily to provide a target for links to [[symmetric difference]] from [[measurable space]]!
=--


## In natural language

It is widely said that 'or' in English can mean either inclusive or exclusive disjunction, while Latin has two terms, respectively 'vel' and 'aut'.  It\'s not at all clear that this is correct.  It may be more correct that 'or' can sometimes mean [[union]] and sometimes [[disjoint union]] (with the latter sometimes external and sometimes internal), but never symmetric difference.  Thus, the only meaning of 'or' is for some kind of [[coproduct]], which exclusive disjunction is not.  (Similarly, 'aut' may be more about disjoint union than symmetric difference.)

+-- {: .query}
What about the 'or' of parental threat? Consider the logician parent who says "Come here or I'll smack you" to his child and smacks even after obedience as they believe in the inclusive 'or'. -David

That\'s no different from 'If you don\'t come here, then I\'ll smack you.', which also suggests (but does not state) the converse.  And in fact, no parent, logician or otherwise, is actually making the promise implied by the $\neg(p \wedge q)$ clause; if the child comes to such a parent and then kicks the parent in the shin, then the parent will still smack the child.  Instead, if you *want* to make that promise, then you say 'If you come here, then I won\'t smack you.' explicitly.  This has a very different tenor (unless you say it in a wink-nudge mafia kind of way), as it\'s a promise rather than a threat.  (I know, it\'s *only* a promise, which is still different in tenor than a statement that is *both* promise and threat, as an exclusive disjunction would be.  But I still hold that your statement is *only* a threat.)  Note that a logician child who believes the parent\'s literal expression would still choose to come if avoiding smacking is the highest priority; but the reason is that refusal guarantees a smack, not that obedience necessarily avoids it.  That is why the wise child also throws in a contrite expression and an oral apology, to improve the odds.  ---Toby
=--

I should find the reference that argued this; it certainly did not use this terminology.


[[!redirects exclusive union]]
[[!redirects symmetric difference]]
