pages/1674.md, before:

[[!redirects Hartogs&#39;s number]]

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Foundations
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

The _Hartogs number_ of a [[cardinal number]] $\kappa$ is the number of ways to [[well-order]] a set of cardinality at most $\kappa$.[^term]

[^term]: The spelling _Hartogs' number_, or even _Hartog's number_, is also in use. The latter based presumably on a misapprehension since the concept was originally proposed by the German mathematician Friedrich Hartogs (1874-1943) in 1915.

Assuming the [[axiom of choice]], it is the smallest [[ordinal number]] whose cardinality is greater than $\kappa$ and therefore the [[successor]] of $\kappa$ as a cardinal number.  But even without the axiom of choice, it makes sense and is often an effective substitute for such a successor.


## Definition

We will define the Hartogs number as a [[functor]]ial operation from [[sets]] to [[well-ordered sets]].  The operation on numbers is just a round-about way of talking about the same thing.

So let $S$ be a set.  Without the axiom of choice (or more precisely, the [[well-ordering theorem]]), it may not be possible to well-order $S$ itself, but we can certainly well-order some [[subsets]] of $S$.  On the other hand, if we can well-order $S$ (or a subset), then there may be many different ways to do so, even non[[isomorphism|isomorphic]] ways.  So to begin with, let us form the collection of all well-ordered subsets of $S$, that is the subset of
$$ \coprod_{A: \mathcal{P}S} \mathcal{P}(A \times A) ,$$
where $\coprod$ indicates [[disjoint union]] and $\mathcal{P}$ indicates [[power set]], consisting of those pairs $(A,R)$ such that $R$ is a well-ordering.  Then form a [[quotient set]] by identifying all well-ordered subsets that are isomorphic as well-ordered sets.  This gives a set of well-order types, or [[ordinal numbers]], which can itself be well-ordered by the general theory of ordinal numbers.

The __Hartogs number__ of $S$ is this well-ordered set, the set of all order types of well-ordered subsets of $S$.  It is denoted $\aleph(S)$.  If $\kappa$ is the cardinality of $S$, then let $\kappa^+$ be the cardinality or ordinal rank (as desired) of the Hartogs number of $S$; this is called the __Hartogs number__ of $\kappa$.


## Properties

There is no [[injection]] to $S$ from $\aleph(S)$; this theorem is to [[Cantor's theorem]] as [[Burali-Forti's paradox]] is to [[Russell's paradox]].  That is, using the usual ordering of cardinal numbers, $\kappa^+ \nleq \kappa$.  So if this $\leq$ is a [[total order]] (a statement equivalent to the [[axiom of choice]]), we can say that $\kappa^+ \gt \kappa$.

Even without choice, however, we can say this:  If $\alpha$ is an ordinal number such that $|\alpha| \nleq \kappa$, then $\kappa^+ \leq \alpha$.  (Notice that we\'ve shifted our thinking of the Hartogs number from a cardinal to an ordinal.)  That is, $\kappa^+$ is the smallest ordinal number whose cardinal number is not at most $\kappa$.  This doesn\'t use any form of choice except for [[excluded middle]]; we only need choice to conclude that $|\kappa^+| \gt \kappa$.

The axiom of choice also implies the well-ordering theorem, that any set can be well-ordered.  Thus with choice, $\kappa^+$ is (now as a cardinal again) the smallest cardinal number greater than $\kappa$; this explains the notation $\kappa^+$. 

Notice that $X$ can be well-ordered if there is an injection $i: X \to \aleph(X)$ (any subset of a well-ordered set inherits a well-order). As an amusing illustration of this principle, we will prove an old result due to Sierpinski: 

+-- {: .num_prop} 
###### Proposition 
If the generalized [[continuum hypothesis]] holds, then the 
[[axiom of choice]] holds, i.e., ZF + GCH implies AC. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
In fact we will show that any set $Y$ can be well-ordered, which implies AC (see the article [[Zorn's lemma]]). We may restrict attention to infinite $Y$, and since there is a singleton embedding of $Y$ in its power set $X = P(Y)$, we need only exhibit a well-ordering of $X$ (since we can then well-order $Y$ by restriction along singletons). In fact the only property of such $X$ that we require below is $|X| = 2|X|$. 

First, the Hartogs set $\aleph(X)$ can be constructed explicitly in ZF as a subset of the triple power set $P^3(X) = P P P(X)$. We will show for $n \in \{1, 2, 3\}$ that under GCH, if $|\aleph(X)| \leq |P^n(X)|$ (where $|X| \leq |Y|$ means there is a mono $X \to Y$), then either 

1. $|X| \leq |\aleph(X)|$ (whence $X$ can be well-ordered), or 

1. $|\aleph(X)| \leq |P^{n-1}(X)|$. 

Iterating this, we cannot descend through case 2 all the way down to $|\aleph(X)| \leq |P^0(X)| = |X|$, so we wind up in case 1: $X$ can be well-ordered. Since every set $X$ can be well-ordered, we deduce AC (as discussed at [[Zorn's lemma]]). 

For this, we need a spot of cardinal arithmetic in ZF. First, for any infinite set $X$, we have $|P(X)| = |2^X| = |2^{X + 1}| = 2\cdot |2^X| = 2|P(X)|$. Second, we **claim** 

* If $P, A$ are sets such that $|P| = 2|P|$ and $|A+P| = |2^P|$, then $|2^P| \leq |A|$  

whose ZF-proof will be a diagonal argument that we give in a moment. Granting the claim, let us continue. We have 

$$|P^{n-1}(X)| \leq |\aleph(X)| + |P^{n-1}(X)| \stackrel{hypoth}{\leq} |P^n(X)| + |P^{n-1}(X)| \leq 2|P^n(X)| = |P^n(X)|$$ 

or just 

$$|P^{n-1}(X)| \leq |\aleph(X)| + |P^{n-1}(X)| \leq |P^n(X)|.$$ 

By GCH, one of those two inequalities is an equality. If the first inequality is an equality, then we conclude $|\aleph(X)| \leq |P^{n-1}(X)|$, which lands us in case 2. If the second inequality is an equality, then the claim applies and we conclude $|P^n(X)| \leq |\aleph(X)|$. Consequently $|X| \leq |\aleph(X)|$ and we are in case 1. 

So we are done except for the claim. 

=-- 

## Examples

For $n$ a [[natural number]] regarded as the cardinal number of a [[finite set]], $n^+$ is the usual [[successor]] $n + 1$.  This result uses excluded middle; else we get the _plump_ successor of $n$, which may be rather larger.

For $\aleph_0$ the cardinality of the set of all [[natural number]]s, the Hartogs number $\aleph_0^+ = \omega_1$ is the smallest [[uncountable set|uncountable]] ordinal.  Assuming the axiom of choice ([[countable choice]] and excluded middle are enough), we have $\aleph_0^+ = \aleph_1$ as a cardinal.

In general, we get a sequence $\omega_\alpha$ of infinite cardinalities of well-orderable sets; assuming excluded middle, every infinite well-orderable cardinality shows up in this sequence.  Assuming the axiom of choice, every infinite cardinal shows up, and we have $|\omega_\alpha| = \aleph_\alpha$.  (Actually, there\'s no real need to begin with infinite cardinals; if we started with $\omega_0 = 0$ instead of $\omega_0 = \mathbf{N}$ and $\aleph_0 = 0$ instead of $\aleph_0 = |\mathbf{N}|$, then absolutely *every* cardinality or well-orderable cardinality would appear.)

## Related page

* [wikipedia entry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hartogs_number)

## Related entries

* [[well-ordering theorem]]

* [[axiom of choice]]

* [[diagonal argument]]

## References

* Friedrich Hartogs, _Über das Problem der Wohlordnung_ , Math. Ann. **76** no.4 (1915) pp.438-443. ([gdz](http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/img/?PPN=GDZPPN002266105))

* [[Radu Diaconescu]], _On Comparability in a Topos_ , Proc. AMS **98** no.3 (1986) pp.389-393. ([pdf](http://www.ams.org/journals/proc/1986-098-03/S0002-9939-1986-0857927-9/S0002-9939-1986-0857927-9.pdf))


[[!redirects Hartog&#39;s number]]
[[!redirects Hartogs number]]
[[!redirects Hartogs’s number]]
[[!redirects Hartogs’ number]]
[[!redirects Hartogg’s number]]
[[!redirects Hartog’s number]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 104751 Revision date: 2016-01-26 22:59:34 Page name: Hartogs number Author: Todd Trimble IP address: 67.81.95.215

pages/1674.md, after:

[[!redirects Hartogs&#39;s number]]

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Foundations
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

The _Hartogs number_ of a [[cardinal number]] $\kappa$ is the number of ways to [[well-order]] a set of cardinality at most $\kappa$.[^term]

[^term]: The spelling _Hartogs' number_, or even _Hartog's number_, is also in use. The latter based presumably on a misapprehension since the concept was originally proposed by the German mathematician Friedrich Hartogs (1874-1943) in 1915.

Assuming the [[axiom of choice]], it is the smallest [[ordinal number]] whose cardinality is greater than $\kappa$ and therefore the [[successor]] of $\kappa$ as a cardinal number.  But even without the axiom of choice, it makes sense and is often an effective substitute for such a successor.


## Definition

We will define the Hartogs number as a [[functor]]ial operation from [[sets]] to [[well-ordered sets]].  The operation on numbers is just a round-about way of talking about the same thing.

So let $S$ be a set.  Without the axiom of choice (or more precisely, the [[well-ordering theorem]]), it may not be possible to well-order $S$ itself, but we can certainly well-order some [[subsets]] of $S$.  On the other hand, if we can well-order $S$ (or a subset), then there may be many different ways to do so, even non[[isomorphism|isomorphic]] ways.  So to begin with, let us form the collection of all well-ordered subsets of $S$, that is the subset of
$$ \coprod_{A: \mathcal{P}S} \mathcal{P}(A \times A) ,$$
where $\coprod$ indicates [[disjoint union]] and $\mathcal{P}$ indicates [[power set]], consisting of those pairs $(A,R)$ such that $R$ is a well-ordering.  Then form a [[quotient set]] by identifying all well-ordered subsets that are isomorphic as well-ordered sets.  This gives a set of well-order types, or [[ordinal numbers]], which can itself be well-ordered by the general theory of ordinal numbers.

The __Hartogs number__ of $S$ is this well-ordered set, the set of all order types of well-ordered subsets of $S$.  It is denoted $\aleph(S)$.  If $\kappa$ is the cardinality of $S$, then let $\kappa^+$ be the cardinality or ordinal rank (as desired) of the Hartogs number of $S$; this is called the __Hartogs number__ of $\kappa$.


## Properties

There is no [[injection]] to $S$ from $\aleph(S)$; this theorem is to [[Cantor's theorem]] as [[Burali-Forti's paradox]] is to [[Russell's paradox]].  That is, using the usual ordering of cardinal numbers, $\kappa^+ \nleq \kappa$.  So if this $\leq$ is a [[total order]] (a statement equivalent to the [[axiom of choice]]), we can say that $\kappa^+ \gt \kappa$.

Even without choice, however, we can say this:  If $\alpha$ is an ordinal number such that $|\alpha| \nleq \kappa$, then $\kappa^+ \leq \alpha$.  (Notice that we\'ve shifted our thinking of the Hartogs number from a cardinal to an ordinal.)  That is, $\kappa^+$ is the smallest ordinal number whose cardinal number is not at most $\kappa$.  This doesn\'t use any form of choice except for [[excluded middle]]; we only need choice to conclude that $|\kappa^+| \gt \kappa$.

The axiom of choice also implies the well-ordering theorem, that any set can be well-ordered.  Thus with choice, $\kappa^+$ is (now as a cardinal again) the smallest cardinal number greater than $\kappa$; this explains the notation $\kappa^+$. 

### GCH implies AC 

In [[ZF]] (without C, the [[axiom of choice]]), a set $X$ can be well-ordered if there is an injection $i: X \to \aleph(X)$, for any subset of a well-ordered set inherits a well-order. As an amusing illustration of this principle, we will prove an old result due to Sierpi&nacute;ski, following [Gillman](#Gill): 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 
If the generalized [[continuum hypothesis]] holds, then the 
[[axiom of choice]] holds, i.e., ZF + GCH implies AC. 
=-- 

(Recall the GCH: it says that for infinite sets $Y, Z$, if $|Y| \leq |Z| \leq |P(Y)|$, then $|Y| = |Z|$ or $|Z| = |P(Y)|$, letting $|Y|$ denote the cardinality as usual and $|Y| \leq |Z|$ means there is a [[monomorphism]] $Y \to Z$.) 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
In fact we will show that any set $Y$ can be well-ordered, which implies AC (see the article [[Zorn's lemma]]). We may restrict attention to infinite $Y$, and since there is a singleton embedding of $Y$ in its power set $X = P(Y)$, we need only exhibit a well-ordering of $X$ (since we can then well-order $Y$ by restriction along singletons). In fact the only property of such $X$ that we require below is $|X| = 2|X|$. 

Now, the Hartogs number $\aleph(X)$ can be constructed explicitly in ZF as a subset of the triple power set $P^3(X) = P P P(X)$. We will show for $n \in \{1, 2, 3\}$ that under GCH, the hypothesis $|\aleph(X)| \leq |P^n(X)|$ leads to one of two conclusions: 

1. $|X| \leq |\aleph(X)|$ (whence $X$ can be well-ordered), or 

1. $|\aleph(X)| \leq |P^{n-1}(X)|$. 

If we land in case 2, then we loop around and feed that conclusion back into the hypothesis and iterate. Iterating this, we cannot descend through case 2 all the way down to $|\aleph(X)| \leq |P^0(X)| = |X|$, so after a few iterations we wind up in case 1 anyway: $X$ can be well-ordered. 

To show this, we need a spot of cardinal arithmetic in ZF. First, we already observed that $|P| = |2P|$ if $P$ is an infinite power set (easy exercise). Second, we **claim** 

* If $P, A$ are sets such that $|P| = |2P|$ and $|A+P| = |2^P|$, then $|2^P| \leq |A|$  

whose ZF-proof uses a diagonal argument that we give in a moment. Granting the claim, let us continue. We have 

$$|P^{n-1}(X)| \leq |\aleph(X)| + |P^{n-1}(X)| \stackrel{hypoth}{\leq} |P^n(X)| + |P^{n-1}(X)| \leq 2|P^n(X)| = |P^n(X)|$$ 

or just 

$$|P^{n-1}(X)| \leq |\aleph(X)| + |P^{n-1}(X)| \leq |P^n(X)|.$$ 

By GCH, one of those two inequalities is an equality. If the first inequality is an equality, then we conclude $|\aleph(X)| \leq |P^{n-1}(X)|$, which lands us in case 2. If the second inequality is an equality, then the claim applies and we conclude $|P^n(X)| \leq |\aleph(X)|$, in which case $|X| \leq |P^n(X)| \leq |\aleph(X)|$ and we land in case 1. 

So we are all done except for the claim. Suppose we have a bijection $g: A + P \stackrel{\sim}{\to} 2^P$. Let $f$ be the composite 

$$P \stackrel{incl}{\to} A + P \stackrel{g}{\to} 2^P \cong 2^{P + P} \cong 2^P \times 2^P \stackrel{\pi_1}{\to} 2^P$$ 

where $\pi_1$ denotes first projection. By Cantor's argument, no element $p \in P$ gets mapped by $f$ to $C = \{x \in P: x \notin f(x)\}$. It follows that under the bijection $A + P \cong 2^P \times 2^P$, those elements of $A + P$ that map to elements of the fiber $\pi_1^{-1}(\{C\})$ can only belong to the summand $A$. Thus it is a subset of $A$ that maps bijectively onto $\pi_1^{-1}(\{C\}) \cong 2^P$, and this proves $|2^P| \leq |A|$. 
=-- 

## Examples

For $n$ a [[natural number]] regarded as the cardinal number of a [[finite set]], $n^+$ is the usual [[successor]] $n + 1$.  This result uses excluded middle; else we get the _plump_ successor of $n$, which may be rather larger.

For $\aleph_0$ the cardinality of the set of all [[natural number]]s, the Hartogs number $\aleph_0^+ = \omega_1$ is the smallest [[uncountable set|uncountable]] ordinal.  Assuming the axiom of choice ([[countable choice]] and excluded middle are enough), we have $\aleph_0^+ = \aleph_1$ as a cardinal.

In general, we get a sequence $\omega_\alpha$ of infinite cardinalities of well-orderable sets; assuming excluded middle, every infinite well-orderable cardinality shows up in this sequence.  Assuming the axiom of choice, every infinite cardinal shows up, and we have $|\omega_\alpha| = \aleph_\alpha$.  (Actually, there\'s no real need to begin with infinite cardinals; if we started with $\omega_0 = 0$ instead of $\omega_0 = \mathbf{N}$ and $\aleph_0 = 0$ instead of $\aleph_0 = |\mathbf{N}|$, then absolutely *every* cardinality or well-orderable cardinality would appear.)

## Related page

* [wikipedia entry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hartogs_number)

## Related entries

* [[well-ordering theorem]]

* [[axiom of choice]]

* [[diagonal argument]]

## References

* Friedrich Hartogs, _Über das Problem der Wohlordnung_ , Math. Ann. **76** no.4 (1915) pp.438-443. ([gdz](http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/img/?PPN=GDZPPN002266105))

* [[Radu Diaconescu]], _On Comparability in a Topos_ , Proc. AMS **98** no.3 (1986) pp.389-393. ([pdf](http://www.ams.org/journals/proc/1986-098-03/S0002-9939-1986-0857927-9/S0002-9939-1986-0857927-9.pdf)) 

* Leonard Gillman, _Two Classical Surprises Concerning the Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis_, Amer. Math. Monthly 109 (June-July 2002), 544-553. ([pdf](https://www.maa.org/sites/default/files/pdf/upload_library/22/Ford/Gillman544-553.pdf)) 
 {#Gill} 


[[!redirects Hartog&#39;s number]]
[[!redirects Hartogs number]]
[[!redirects Hartogs’s number]]
[[!redirects Hartogs’ number]]
[[!redirects Hartogg’s number]]
[[!redirects Hartog’s number]]
