Let $A$ and $B$ be [[algebraic theory|algebraic theories]]. The category $[A,B]$ of **$(A,B)$-bimodels** and their homomorphisms is the category of $A$-models and homomorphisms in $B Mod^{op}$. An alternative description is that is a co-$A$-model in $B Mod$. Each such bimodel $M$ determines and is determined by a pair of [[adjoint functor]]s

$$Hom_B(M,?): B Mod \to A Mod$$

$$M\otimes_A ?: A Mod \to B Mod$$

Composition of such adjoint pairs yields a functor

$$\otimes_B: [B,C]\times [A,B] \to [A,C]$$

The category $[A,A]$ has a unit object -- it would be churlish not to overload our notation yet further by calling it $A$, corresponding to the fact that the free $A$-model on one generator has a canonical co-$A$-structure.

So we have a [[bicategory]]; the 0-cells are algebraic theories, the 1-cells are bimodels and the 2-cells are homomorphisms of bimodels. Consider a [[monad]] in this bicategory: an algebraic theory $A$, an $(A,A)$-bimodel $M$, and homomorphisms $\eta : A\to M$, $\mu : M\otimes_A M \to M$ satisfying the usual rules. A [[algebra of a monad|module]] of this monad is given by an $A$-model $B$ together with an action $M\otimes_A B \to B$ satisfying the usual rules. It should be clear that such modules are models of an algebraic theory, which we shall confusingly denote by $M$. This theory is an extension of $A$ by unary operations (the elements of the underlying set of the underlying $A$-model of the underlying $(A,A)$-bimodel of the monad). The rules for composing them are given by $\mu$. They satisfy [[distributive law]]s over the operations of $A$ given by the co-$A$-structure of $M$.

We may overload $\eta$ to refer both to a homomorphism of bimodels and to a map of algebraic theories. The forgetful functor $M Mod \to A Mod$ has for its left adjoint the functor $M\otimes_A ?$, but it also has a right adjoint $Hom_A(M,?)$. So in this case the forgetful functor preserves colimits as well as limits. In fact all maps of theories whose associated forgetful functors have [[adjoint functor|right adjoint]]s must arise from such a monad in the bicategory of bimodels.

+-- {: .query}
You\'ve probably noticed, Gavin, that I\'ve been messing with your dashes.  In `$A-Mod$`, the dash comes out as a minus sign, so I got rid of that; but `$AMod$` runs it all together as one symbol, so you do need a space as in `$A Mod$`.  On the other hand, I think that it was overzealous of me to introduce my own dashes in place of your question marks, so I changed them back.  By the way, if you really want a hyphen in math mode, there are two ways to do it: either cheat as in `$A$-$Mod$` or use the Unicode hard hyphen character as in `$A‐Mod$`.  ---Toby
=--

I would like some snappier terminology at this point. What should we call these monads in the bicategory of bimodels? If we use words like _algebra_ or _monad_ our rickety overloaded onomastic scaffolding starts to creak ominously. Put on your hard hats. We are in territory where to discriminate too meticulously between different views of the same thing is to invite fuddlement. And yet we have to hold in our heads that [[isomorphism]] is not [[equality]], and that too cavalier an approach to identification can sometimes lead to error.