
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Gravity
+--{: .hide}
[[!include gravity contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[spacetime]] geometry of a [[black hole]] or [[black brane]] close to the [[horizon]] is called its _near-horizon geometry_. Accordingly, the geometry far from the horizon might be called its _far-horizon geometry_. One commonly says that the black hole/brane solution _interpolates_ between its near and far horizon geometry.

## Properties

### Near-horizon geometry

For [[black brane|black]] [[M-branes]] ([[black branes]] in [[11-dimensional supergravity]]) of [[dimension]] $p+1$ that preserve some [[supersymmetry]], the near horizon geometry is always a [[Cartesian product]] of an [[anti-de Sitter spacetime]] $AdS_{p+2}$ with a [[compact topological space|compact]] [[Einstein manifold]] $X_{11-(p+2)}$; 

$$
  Ads_{p+2} \times X_{d-(p+2)}
  \,;
$$

while for [[black brane|black]] [[D-branes]] and [[NS5-branes]] in [[type II supergravity]] the near horizon geometry is [[conformal transformation|conformal]] to a geometry of this form $AdS_{p+2} \times X_{d-(p+2)}$ (see [AFFHS 98, section 2](#AFFHS98)).

### Far-horizon geometry

In contrast, the "far-horizon geometry" of all those [[black branes]] whose near horizon geometry is $AdS_{p+2} \times X_{d-(p+2)}$ (i.e. actual [[anti-de Sitter spacetime]] without conformal factor) is of the form 

$$
  \mathbb{R}^{p,1} \times C\left(X_{d-(p+2)}\right)
  \,,
$$

where $\mathbb{R}^{p,1}$ is [[Minkowski spacetime]] (the brane [[worldvolume]]) and $C(X_{d-(p+2)})$ is the [[metric cone]] over $X_{d-(p+2)}$ (see [AFFHS 98, section 3](#AFFHS98)). Since this "far-horizon limit" is still a solution to the [[supergravity]] [[equations of motion]] away from the tip of the cone, it may in itself be regarded as a "[[cone brane]]"-solution (see [AFFHS 98, section 3.1](#AFFHS98)).

If $X_{d-(p+2)}$ is a smooth [[quotient space]] by the [[action]] of a [[finite subgroup of SU(2)]], then the corresponding [[cone brane]] is a brane "at an [[ADE-singularity]]".

Examples and applications of such cone branes, in the context of [[M-theory on G2-manifolds]], are discussed in [Atiyah-Witten 01](#AtiyahWitten01).


## Related concepts

* [[anti-de Sitter spacetime]]

* [[asymptotic boundary]]

## References

* Hari K. Kunduri, James Lucietti, _Classification of Near-Horizon Geometries of Extremal Black Holes_ ([web](http://relativity.livingreviews.org/Articles/lrr-2013-8/title.html))

That the near horizon geometry of the [[extremal black hole|extremal]] [[Reissner-Nordström black hole]] in $\mathcal{N}=2$ [[4d supergravity]] is $AdS_2 \times S^2$ was observed in 

* [[Gary Gibbons]], in F. del Aguila, [[J. de Azcarraga]], [[Luis Ibanez]] (eds.) _Supersymmetry, Supergravity and Related Topics_

That the near horizon geometry of [[black branes]] in [[11-dimensional supergravity]] is (conformal to) [[anti de Sitter spacetime]] times some [[compact space]] is apparently due to 

* {#GibbonsTownsend93} [[Gary Gibbons]], [[Paul Townsend]], _Vacuum interpolation in supergravity via super p-branes_, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, (1993) 3754 ([arXiv:hep-th/9307049](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9307049))

* {#DuffGibbonsTownsend94} [[Mike Duff]], [[Gary Gibbons]], [[Paul Townsend]], _Macroscopic superstrings as interpolating solitons_, Phys. Lett. B. 332 (1994) 32 ([arXiv:hep-th/9405124](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9405124))

* {#GibbonsHorowitzTownend95} [[Gary Gibbons]], [[Gary Horowitz]], [[Paul Townsend]], _Higher-dimensional resolution of dilatonic black hole singularities_, Class. Quant. Grav. 12 (1995) 297 ([arXiv:hep-th/9410073](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9410073))

* [[Gary Gibbons]], Nucl. Phys. B207, (1982) 337;

* [[Renata Kallosh]], [[Amanda Peet]], Phys. Rev. B46, (1992) 5223;

* [[Sergio Ferrara]], [[Gary Gibbons]], [[Renata Kallosh]], Nucl. Phys. B500, (1997) 75;

* [[Ali Chamseddine]], [[Sergio Ferrara]], [[Gary Gibbons]], [[Renata Kallosh]], Phys. Rev. D55, (1997) 3647

The observation that the resulting [[isometry group]] is the bosonic body of one of the [[orthosymplectic super groups]] is due to

* P. Claus, [[Renata Kallosh]], J. Kumar, [[Paul Townsend]], [[Antoine Van Proeyen]], _Conformal Theory of M2, D3, M5 and D1+D5 Branes_, JHEP 9806 (1998) 004 ([arXiv:hep-th/9801206](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9801206))

A decent account is in 

* {#AFFHS98} [[Bobby Acharya]], [[Jose Figueroa-O'Farrill]], [[Chris Hull]], B. Spence, _Branes at conical singularities and holography_, Adv. Theor.Math. Phys.2:1249-1286, 1999 ([arXiv:hep-th/9808014](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9808014))

reviewed in

* {#FigOFar98} [[Jose Figueroa-O'Farrill]], _Near-horizon geometries of supersymmetric branes_, talk at [SUSY 98](http://inspirehep.net/record/971430/) ([arXiv:hep-th/9807149](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9807149), [talk slides](http://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/~jmf/CV/Seminars/SUSY98.pdf))

Examples and applications of cone branes in the context of [[M-theory on G2-manifolds]] are discussed in

* {#AtiyahWitten01} [[Michael Atiyah]], [[Edward Witten]] _$M$-Theory dynamics on a manifold of $G_2$-holonomy_, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 6 (2001) ([arXiv:hep-th/0107177](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0107177))



See also

* Wikipedia, _[Near-horizon metric](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Near-horizon_metric)_


[[!redirects near-horizon geometries]]

[[!redirects near horizon geometry]]
[[!redirects near horizon geometries]]

[[!redirects far-horizon geometry]]
[[!redirects far-horizon geometries]]

[[!redirects far horizon geometry]]
[[!redirects far horizon geometries]]


[[!redirects near-horizon limit]]
[[!redirects near-horizon limits]]

[[!redirects near horizon limit]]
[[!redirects near horizon limits]]


[[!redirects near-horizon metric]]
[[!redirects near-horizon metrices]]

[[!redirects far-horizon metric]]
[[!redirects far-horizon metrices]]

[[!redirects cone brane]]
[[!redirects cone branes]]

