pages/1680.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

For $A$ an [[abelian group]], the _Eilenberg-Mac Lane spectrum_ $H A$ is the [[spectrum]] that [[Brown representability theorem|represents]] the [[ordinary cohomology|ordinary]] [[cohomology theory]]/[[ordinary homology]]  with [[coefficients]] in $A$.

By default $A$ is taken to be the [[integers]] and hence "the Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum" is $H \mathbb{Z}$, representing [[integral cohomology]].

## Definition

As a [[symmetric spectrum]]: ([Schwede 12, example I.2.6](#Schwede12))

## Properties

### As a symmetric monoidal $\infty$-groupoid.

As a [[symmetric monoidal (∞,1)-category|symmetric monoidal]] [[∞-groupoid]] the _Eilenberg--Mac Lane_ [[spectrum]] is the [[abelian group]] of [[integers]] (under addition)

$$
  E_{EM} := \mathbb{Z}
  \,.
$$

Here the set $\mathbb{Z}$ is regarded as a [[discrete category|discrete groupoid]] (one object per integer, no nontrivial morphisms) whose symmetric monoidal structure is that given by the additive group structure on the integers.

Accordingly, the infinite tower of [[suspension]]s induced by this is the sequence of [[∞-groupoid]]s

$$
  \mathbb{Z}, \mathbf{B} \mathbb{Z}, \mathbf{B}^2 \mathbb{Z}, \mathbf{B}^3 \mathbb{Z}, \cdots
$$

that in this case happen to be [[strict omega-groupoid]]s. The [[strict omega-groupoid]] $\mathbf{B}^n \mathbb{Z}$ has only [[identity]] $k$-morphisms for all $k$, except for $k = n$, where $\mathrm{Mor}_n(\mathbf{B}^n \mathbb{Z}) = \mathbb{Z}$ are the endomorphisms of the unique identity $(n-1)$-morphism. 

The [[strict ∞-groupoid]] $\mathbf{B}^n \mathbb{Z}$ is the one given under the [[Dold-Kan correspondence]] by the [[crossed complex]] of groupoids that is trivial everywhere and has the group $\mathbb{Z}$ in degree $n$.

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    [\mathbf{B}^n \mathbb{Z}] &=
     (  \cdots \to [\mathbf{B}^n\mathbb{Z}]_{n+1} \to [\mathbf{B}^n\mathbb{Z}]_{n} \to 
     [\mathbf{B}^n\mathbb{Z}]_{n-1} \cdots \to [\mathbf{B}^n\mathbb{Z}]_{1} \stackrel{\to}{\to} [\mathbf{B}^n\mathbb{Z}]_{0})
      \\ &=
    (  \cdots \to {*} \to \mathbb{Z} \to 
    {*} \cdots \to {*} \stackrel{\to}{\to} {*})
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Under the  [[Quillen equivalence]]

$$
  |-| : \infty Grpds \to Top
$$

between [[infinity-groupoid]]s and [[topological space]]s (see [[homotopy hypothesis]]) this sequence of suspensions of $\mathbb{Z}$ maps to the sequence of [[Eilenberg–Mac Lane space]]s

$$
  |\mathbf{B}^n \mathbb{Z}|
  \simeq
  K(\mathbb{Z}, n)
$$

that give the Eilenberg--Mac Lane spectrum 

$$
  (E_n) := (K(\mathbb{Z},n))
$$

its name.


### Chromatic filtration

[[!include chromatic tower examples - table]]


## Related concepts

* [[generalized Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]]

* [[Moore spectrum]]

* [[cohomology theory]], [[ordinary cohomology]]


## References

Lecture notes include

* {#May} [[Peter May]], chapter 22 of _A concise course in algebraic topology_ ([pdf](http://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/~aar/papers/maybook.pdf))

* {#Rognes12} [[John Rognes]], section 3.2 3.4 of _The Adams spectral sequence_, 2012 ([pdf](http://folk.uio.no/rognes/papers/notes.050612.pdf))

* {#Schwede12} [[Stefan Schwede]], Example I.2.7 in _Symmetric spectra_, 2012 ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/~schwede/SymSpec.pdf))

[[!redirects Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg--MacLane spectrum]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg--Mac Lane spectrum]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg–MacLane spectrum]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg–Mac Lane spectrum]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg-MacLane spectra]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg-Mac Lane spectra]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg--MacLane spectra]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg--Mac Lane spectra]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg–MacLane spectra]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg–Mac Lane spectra]]


[[!redirects HA]]
[[!redirects HC]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 105183 Revision date: 2016-02-05 05:15:15 Page name: Eilenberg-Mac Lane spectrum Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 86.187.77.97

pages/1680.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

For $A$ an [[abelian group]], the _Eilenberg-Mac Lane spectrum_ $H A$ is the [[spectrum]] that [[Brown representability theorem|represents]] the [[ordinary cohomology|ordinary]] [[cohomology theory]]/[[ordinary homology]]  with [[coefficients]] in $A$.

By default $A$ is taken to be the [[integers]] and hence "the Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum" is $H \mathbb{Z}$, representing [[integral cohomology]].

## Definition

As a [[symmetric spectrum]]: ([Schwede 12, example I.2.6](#Schwede12))

## Properties

### As a symmetric monoidal $\infty$-groupoid.

As a [[symmetric monoidal (∞,1)-category|symmetric monoidal]] [[∞-groupoid]] the _Eilenberg--Mac Lane_ [[spectrum]] is the [[abelian group]] of [[integers]] (under addition)

$$
  E_{EM} := \mathbb{Z}
  \,.
$$

Here the set $\mathbb{Z}$ is regarded as a [[discrete category|discrete groupoid]] (one object per integer, no nontrivial morphisms) whose symmetric monoidal structure is that given by the additive group structure on the integers.

Accordingly, the infinite tower of [[suspension]]s induced by this is the sequence of [[∞-groupoid]]s

$$
  \mathbb{Z}, \mathbf{B} \mathbb{Z}, \mathbf{B}^2 \mathbb{Z}, \mathbf{B}^3 \mathbb{Z}, \cdots
$$

that in this case happen to be [[strict omega-groupoid]]s. The [[strict omega-groupoid]] $\mathbf{B}^n \mathbb{Z}$ has only [[identity]] $k$-morphisms for all $k$, except for $k = n$, where $\mathrm{Mor}_n(\mathbf{B}^n \mathbb{Z}) = \mathbb{Z}$ are the endomorphisms of the unique identity $(n-1)$-morphism. 

The [[strict ∞-groupoid]] $\mathbf{B}^n \mathbb{Z}$ is the one given under the [[Dold-Kan correspondence]] by the [[crossed complex]] of groupoids that is trivial everywhere and has the group $\mathbb{Z}$ in degree $n$.

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    [\mathbf{B}^n \mathbb{Z}] &=
     (  \cdots \to [\mathbf{B}^n\mathbb{Z}]_{n+1} \to [\mathbf{B}^n\mathbb{Z}]_{n} \to 
     [\mathbf{B}^n\mathbb{Z}]_{n-1} \cdots \to [\mathbf{B}^n\mathbb{Z}]_{1} \stackrel{\to}{\to} [\mathbf{B}^n\mathbb{Z}]_{0})
      \\ &=
    (  \cdots \to {*} \to \mathbb{Z} \to 
    {*} \cdots \to {*} \stackrel{\to}{\to} {*})
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Under the  [[Quillen equivalence]]

$$
  |-| : \infty Grpds \to Top
$$

between [[infinity-groupoid]]s and [[topological space]]s (see [[homotopy hypothesis]]) this sequence of suspensions of $\mathbb{Z}$ maps to the sequence of [[Eilenberg–Mac Lane space]]s

$$
  |\mathbf{B}^n \mathbb{Z}|
  \simeq
  K(\mathbb{Z}, n)
$$

that give the Eilenberg--Mac Lane spectrum 

$$
  (E_n) := (K(\mathbb{Z},n))
$$

its name.


### Chromatic filtration

[[!include chromatic tower examples - table]]


### Ordinary homology spectra split

**[[ordinary homology spectra split]]**:
For $S$ any [[spectrum]] and $H A$ an Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum,
then the [[smash product]] $S\wedge H A$ (the $A$-[[ordinary homology]] spectrum)
is non-canonically equivalent to a product of EM-spectra (hence a [[wedge sum]] of EM-spectra in the finite case).

 
## Related concepts

* [[generalized Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]]

* [[Moore spectrum]]

* [[cohomology theory]], [[ordinary cohomology]]


## References

Lecture notes include

* {#May} [[Peter May]], chapter 22 of _A concise course in algebraic topology_ ([pdf](http://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/~aar/papers/maybook.pdf))

* {#Rognes12} [[John Rognes]], section 3.2 3.4 of _The Adams spectral sequence_, 2012 ([pdf](http://folk.uio.no/rognes/papers/notes.050612.pdf))

* {#Schwede12} [[Stefan Schwede]], Example I.2.7 in _Symmetric spectra_, 2012 ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/~schwede/SymSpec.pdf))



[[!redirects Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg--MacLane spectrum]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg--Mac Lane spectrum]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg–MacLane spectrum]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg–Mac Lane spectrum]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg-MacLane spectra]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg-Mac Lane spectra]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg--MacLane spectra]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg--Mac Lane spectra]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg–MacLane spectra]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg–Mac Lane spectra]]


[[!redirects HA]]
[[!redirects HC]]
