# Contents # 
* table of contents 
{:toc}

## Idea 

In enumerative [[combinatorics]], a "bijective proof" refers to a basic method of counting the number of structures of a certain type supported on a finite set of underlying points, by analyzing structure in two different ways. It is really a special case of "[[categorification]]": an identity $a = b$ where $a$ and $b$ are [[natural number]] expressions is proved by taking underlying cardinalities of a [[bijection]] $A \cong B$ between sets of structures, hence the name. (If taking cardinalities is an example of "decategorifying", then going the other way from $a = b$ to $A \cong B$ would be "categorifying" or promoting an equation to an isomorphism.) 

In some sense this is what the theory of [[species]] is all about: formalizing the operations adhering to bijective proofs. Often bijective proofs give an impression of elegance or enlightenment: rather than prove natural number or polynomial identities through acts of symbolic manipulation, one *sees* the identity by drawing pictures of what the two sides of the identity are counting. 

## Examples 

For the moment we'll just jot down some possible examples for illustrating the method; these are to be filled in later, or to be linked to other nLab articles where the bijective proof is given. 

* Binomial identity 

* $q$-binomial identity 

* Counting trees: Cayley's theorem 

* Vandermonde identity 

* Stirling number identities 

## Polynomial identities 

One method for proving [[polynomial]] identities (equations $p = q$ between polynomials $p, q \in \mathbb{C}[x_1, \ldots, x_k]$ in several variables) is first to give a bijective proof for the special case in which natural numbers $m_i$ are substituted for the variables $x_i$, and then reason that there are enough natural numbers that the polynomial identity must hold generally. 

More formally, two polynomials are equal, $p(x_1, \ldots, x_k) = q(x_1, \ldots, x_k)$, if $p(m_1, \ldots, m_k) = q(m_1, \ldots, m_k)$ for all choices of natural numbers $m_i$. Relatedly, the set $\mathbb{N}^k \subseteq \mathbb{C}^k$ is Zariski-dense (i.e., the closure of $\mathbb{N}^k$ in $\mathbb{C}^k$ equipped with the [[Zariski topology]] is all of $\mathbb{C}^k$). 

This is intuitively obvious of course. But as a public service, we offer a proof here (however pedestrian it may be!). 

+-- {: .num_prop} 
###### Proposition 
A polynomial $p(x_1, \ldots, x_k) \in \mathbb{C}[x_1, \ldots, x_k]$ is uniquely determined by its values at natural number arguments. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
By induction on $k$ (or rather, a double induction; see below). The case $k = 0$ is trivial. 

Suppose the result holds for $k = j-1$. Let $p(x_1, \ldots, x_j)$ be a polynomial in $\mathbb{C}[x_1, \ldots, x_j]$. By induction, for each $m \in \mathbb{N}$ the polynomial $p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, m)$ is determined by its values at $(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}) = (m_1, \ldots, m_{j-1}) \in \mathbb{N}^{j-1}$. 

Write $p(x_1, \ldots, x_j) = \sum_{i=0}^n p_i(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}) x_j^i$. 
We argue that $p$ is uniquely determined by its values on $\mathbb{N}^j$ by an induction on $n$, that is to say the degree of $p$ in $x_j$, denoted $deg_j(p)$. The case $deg_j(p) = 0$ reduces to the determination of $p_0(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}) = p(x_1, \ldots x_{j-1}, 0)$, which we have by the previous paragraph. 

Assume as our inductive hypothesis for case $deg_j(p) = n$, that any polynomial $q = q(x_1, \ldots, x_j)$ with $deg_j(q) \leq n-1$ is uniquely determined by 

$$q(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, 0), \qquad q(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, 1), \qquad \ldots, \qquad q(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, n-1).$$ 

In particular let us take 

$$q(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, x_j) \coloneqq p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, x_j + 1) - p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, x_j).$$ 

The leading term of $q$ is $n \cdot p_n(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}) x_j^{n-1}$. Since $deg_j(q) \leq n-1$, we have that $q$ is determined by 

$$\array{
q(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, 0) & = & p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, 1) - p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, 0) \\ 
q(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, 1) & = & p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, 2) - p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, 1) \\
 & \ldots & \\ 
q(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, n-1) & = & p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, n) - p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, n-1)
}$$ 

and in particular the leading coefficient $n \cdot p_n(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1})$ of $q$ is determined by $p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, i)$ for $i = 0$ to $i = n$. This determines the leading coefficient $p_n(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1})$ of $p$. 

Once we have that, then the truncation of $p$, 

$$r(x_1, \ldots, x_j) \coloneqq p(x_1, \ldots, x_j) - p_n(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}) x_j^n,$$ 

satisfies $deg_j(r) \leq n-1$, so again by induction, $r$ is determined from the polynomials $r(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, i)$ for $i = 0$ to $i = n-1$, and thus is determined from $p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, i)$ for $i = 0$ to $i = n$, as we saw in the preceding paragraph. Thus the coefficients of $r$, namely the remaining coefficients of $p$ which are $p_i(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1})$ for $i = 0$ to $n-1$, are determined from $p(x_1, \ldots, x_{j-1}, i)$ for $i = 0$ to $i = n$. This completes the induction. 
=-- 
