[[!redirects gerbes]]

##Idea## 

(The definitions of [[sheaf]] and [[stack]] are elsewhere in the nLab but we will have to review them briefly. There is also  [[motivation for sheaves, cohomology and higher stacks]], which provides other insights. For simplicity of exposition, we will initially look at sheaves, stacks and gerbes over a base space $B$ rather than in the more general setting of a topos.)

Naively a [[sheaf]] is a family of sets indexed 'continuously' by the points of a space $B$.  It corresponds either to a [[presheaf]] satisfying a 'gluing condition' (which is the version of [[descent]] in one of its simplest cases), or to an [[etale space|étale space]] over $B$.  The relationship between them is that the presheaf is the presheaf of local sections of the étale space, and the 'gluing condition' is that local sections that agree on the intersections of  open sets can be glued uniquely to give a section over the union of the open sets.

An important class of sheaves are the [[torsor|torsors]].  Let $G$ be a sheaf of groups on $B$.   The category, $Tors(G)_B$ of $G$-torsors on $B$ is a groupoid.  The notion of $G$-torsor 'localises' well, so that if $U$ is an open set of $B$, then we can restrict $G$ to a sheaf on $U$, and look at the torsors over $U$ using the restricted $G$. (We abuse notation and just write $Tors(G)_U$ for the corresponding groupoid. If $V$ is another open set, say, contained in $U$ there is a restriction functor from $Tors(G)_U$ to $Tors(G)_V$, so it looks as if we have a presheaf of groupoids on $B$, but things are not quite right here.

The assignment of $Tors(G)_U$ to $U$ only gives a [[pseudofunctor]] not a functor from the category $Open(B)^{op}$ to the category of groupoids. It thus corresponds to a [[Grothendieck fibration]] or **fibred category** over $Open(B)$.  It does have quite nice 'gluing properties' however, it is a [[stack]] of groupoids.  (Roughly 'morphisms glue, objects glue up to isomorphism'. For enlightenment note that there are almost presheaves of objects and of morphisms in this 'pseudo' presheaf.) This stack will be called $\mathcal{T}ors(G)$.

There is a **stackcompletion** functor from fibred categories to stacks.  If we take the sheaf of groups $G$, think of it as a presheaf of groupoids $BG$, in the usual way, then it is a pseudo-functor from $Open(B)^{op}$ to the category of groupoids. If we stack complete it we get ... $\mathcal{T}ors(G)$.

We thus can think of a stack of groupoids as a 'lax' generalisation of a sheaf of groupoids.  What about **gerbes**?

(It should be mentioned that often in topological settings the sheaf of groups is actually a constant sheaf and that in that case a $G$-torsor is just a principal $G$-bundle.)


Groups 'are' groupoids with a single object, but groupoids are not 'groups with many objects' (although that is a nice phrase to use when introducing them). A groupoid need not have any objects ... if it is empty! Of course, we think of the vertex groups of a groupoid, but if the groupoid is not connected there may be many different non-isomorphic ones. So a group *is* a very special type of groupoid.

Similarly, the term 'gerbe' refers to a special sort of stack of groupoids. 

+-- {: .standout}
A gerbe is to a general stack what, up to equivalence, a group is to a general groupoid. It is non-empty and connected.
=--

To make this precise we use some additional notions:

We will have a pseudofunctor $F : Open(B)^{op}\to Grpd$, and this will be a stack.


##Definition:## 

* A stack of groupoids, $F$, on $B$ is *locally non-empty* if there is an open covering $\mathcal{U}$ of $B$ for which each groupoid $F(U)$ is non-empty, for $U \in \mathcal{U}$.

* A stack of groupoids, $F$, on $B$ is said to be *locally connected*  if there is an open covering $\mathcal{U}$ of $B$ for which each groupoid $F(U)$ is connected, for $U \in \mathcal{U}$.


and finally:

*A *gerbe* $F$ on $B$ is a locally non-empty, locally connected stack of groupoids on $B$.


It is important to note that it does not state in the definition of a gerbe that the open cover that we have over which it is non-empty is or is not one over which it is connected.

## Example## 
$\mathcal{T}ors(G)$ is a gerbe on $B$.