[[!redirects W. T. Tutte]]
Bill Tutte (b. May 14, 1917; d. May 2, 2002) was a British and Canadian mathematician. 

Tutte made seminal contributions to [[graph theory]] and the theory of [[matroids]]. He [published](#Tutte1958I) the [[Tutte homotopy theorem]] which can be regarded as a generalization of the notion of [[paths]] to matroids, and about which [[Gian-Carlo Rota]] wrote 

> The (...) motivation, (...) in Tutte's vertiginously profound papers, was graph-theoretic. Matroids are objects that play the role of the dual graph of a graph when the graph is not [[planar]]. Almost every fact about graphs that can be formulated without using the term "vertex" has a matroidal analogue. The deepest insight obtained from this yoga is Tutte's homotopy theorem, a unique combinatorial achievement whose far reaching implications are a long way from being fully understood. -- Gian-Carlo Rota: Indiscrete Thoughts. Modern Birkhäuser Classics. Chapter "Book Reviews"

His writing style is sometimes described to be extraordinarily compressed, in cautionary remarks like

> If you read Tutte, remember: it's all there, but take a semester off -- and plan the first ten pages.
(Personal recollections from a seminar) 


## References

* William T. Tutte: _A homotopy theorem for matroids. I_, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 88: 144–160 (1958)
{#Tutte1958I}

* William T. Tutte: _A homotopy theorem for matroids. II_, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 88: 161–174, (1958)
{#Tutte1958II}

* W. T. Tutte (1984), _Graph Theory_, Addison-Wesley.

* W. T. Tutte (1998), _Graph Theory As I Have Known It_, Oxford.

* [Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/W._T._Tutte)

* [St. Andrews History page](http://www-history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/Biographies/Tutte.html)
category:people