Dr Camell Kachour, Ph.D Macquarie University, Supervisors : Michael Batanin and Ross Street.

Education :

10/2013 PhD thesis, Macquarie University, Sydney. Title: Aspects of Globular Higher Category Theory 

Talks :

02/2007 Université de Paris 7, Paris, SIC. Déﬁnition algébrique des cellules non-strictes 

06/2008 Université du Littoral Côte d’Opale, Calais, CT2008. Operadic deﬁnition of the non-strict cells 

01/09/2010 Macquarie University, Sydney. Steps toward the Operadic deﬁnition of the Weak ω-Category of Weak ω-Categories (part 1): Operadic approach of the weak higher transformations 

08/09/2010 Macquarie University, Sydney. Steps toward the Operadic deﬁnition of the Weak ω-Category of Weak ω-Categories (part 2): Weak higher transformations as models for Theories 

15/09/2010 Macquarie University, Sydney. Steps toward the Operadic deﬁnition of the Weak ω-Category of Weak ω-Categories (part 3): The Red Operad 

14/09/2011 Macquarie University, Sydney. An algebraic approach to weak ω-groupoids 

20/12/2011 Université de Paris 7, Paris, PPS seminar. Approche algébrique des ω-groupoïdes faibles 

19/08/2012 Macquarie University, Sydney. The importance of ω-operad of coendomorphism in Higher Category Theory (part 1) 

05/09/2012 Macquarie University, Sydney. The importance of ω-operad of coendomorphism in Higher Category Theory (part 2) 

27/11/2014 USTHB, Algiers. Hommage Catégorique à Alexander Grothendieck 

16/01/2015 Warsaw University, Warsaw. Algebraic Models of (∞,n)-Categories on the Globular Setting 

05/06/2015 Université de Paris 7, Paris. Opérades supérieures de Batanin et Structures inﬁni-graphiques 

11/09/2015 Université de Paris 7, Paris. Vers l’inﬁni-catégorie faible des inﬁni-catégories faibles dans le contexte globulaire

International congress :

06/2008 CT2008, Calais, France. 

10/2008 International Conference, Brussels, Belgium, Royal Flemish Academy. 

06/2010 CT2010, Genova, Italia. 06/2014 CT2014, Cambridge, UK. 

Published and Accepted Articles :

[1] Kamel Kachour, Déﬁnition algébrique des cellules non-strictes, Cahiers de Topologie et de Géométrie Diﬀérentielle Catégorique (2008), volume 1, pages 1–68. 

[2] Camell Kachour, Operadic Deﬁnition of the Non-strict Cells, Cahiers de Topologie et de Géométrie Diﬀérentielle Catégorique (2011), volume 4, pages 1–48. 

[3] Camell Kachour, Algebraic Deﬁnition of weak (∞,n)-Categories, Published in Theory and Applications of Categories (2015), Volume 30, No. 22, pages 775-807 

[4] CamellKachour, ω-OperadsofCoendomorphismsandFractal ω-OperadsforHigherStructures., Published in Categories and General Algebraic Structures with Applications (2015). 

[5] Camell Kachour, Operads of higher transformations for globular sets and for higher magmas, Published in Categories and General Algebraic Structures with Applications (2015). 

[6] Camell Kachour, Steps toward the Weak ω-category of the Weak ω-categories in the globular setting, Published Categories and General Algebraic Structures with Applications (2015). 

Works in Progress : 

[7] Camell Kachour and Jacques Penon, Higher Operads for the Weak Higher Transformations and Stable Pseudo-Algebras, Work in progress (2015). 

[8] CamellKachour,A Canonical Quillen Model Structures on the category of Reﬂexive ω-Magmas, Work in progress (2015). 

[9] Camell Kachour, Lax ω-Categories on the Globular Setting, Work in Progress (2015). 

[10] Camell Kachour, Model of Higher Stacks on the Globular Setting, Work in Progress (2015). 

Experience Teaching :

1996–2008 Examiner, Ministère de l’éducation nationale, Paris. Examiner for undergraduate level students (level for class elites “Special Mathematics” and “Superior Mathematics” in France) 

Languages :

French Mother tongue; English Fluently
Interests : Music Mountain Hikking Japanese Judo

Camell Kachour,
67 rue Brancion, 75015 Paris, France.
camell.kachour@gmail.com