[[!redirects pseudo-metric]]
[[!redirects pseudo-metric spaces]]
[[!redirects pseudo-metrics]]


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Analytic geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include analytic geometry -- contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

The category of metric spaces with Lipschitz maps between them is not good enough from a categorical viewpoint: it has finite limits (the max pseudo-metric on the product) but not all finite colimits: the coproduct doesn't always exist. To overcome this difficulty, we will work with ind-bounded metric spaces, with Lipschitz maps between them (any metric space may be seen as the colimit of its bounded subsets).

The category of bounded metric spaces has all finite limits and colimits (the two terms of the coproduct may be fixed to be at distance $1$, and other limits and colimits are the usual ones). This implies (SGA IV) that its indization has all limits and colimits. The category of ind-bounded metric spaces may thus give a convenient setting for the development of a metric stable homotopy theory.
There is also a natural functor from general metric spaces to ind-bounded metric spaces.

The mapping space between two ind-bounded metric spaces is not strictly speaking an $\mathbb{R}_+$-graded set, but it may be seen as an ind-$\mathbb{R}_+$-graded set.
Using that, one defines a natural adjunction between simplicial $\mathbb{R}_+$-graded sets and ind-bounded metric spaces, that will give a metric analog of the adjunction between simplicial sets and topological spaces. We use this adjunction to define a model structure on both sides, where the interval is given by the limit
$$[0,1]_\infty:=\lim_{t\to \infty}([0,1],d_\infty^t).$$
Two elements inside this interval look like they are at distance zero, but this is not the case, because this limit has a Lipschitz map to $([0,1],d_\infty)$ which is given by the identity map... One must think of this limit as a kind of pro-object (even if it lives in an indization?). Once the interval is defined, one may define the metric simplex $\Delta^n$, and thus compute in the homotopy category of pseudo-metric spaces.

## Related subjects

[[global analytic geometry]]

[[spectral global analytic geometry]]