For any family $\{ C_i \}_{i\in I}$ of coalgebras,
$T(\coprod_i C_i) = \coprod_i T(C_i)$ where
the coproduct on the right-hand side is the coproduct in the category of bialgebras, i.e. the free product of algebras with natural induced coalgebra structure. If the index set are
nonnegative integers and $C_{i+1} = C_i^{\rm cop}$,
the left hand side specializes to an intermediate
stage in building the Takuechi's [[free Hopf algebra]] $H(C)$ on the coalgebra $C$. 

Manin generalized the RHS.
He replaces $T(C_i)$ by any  bialgebra $B_i$
with $B_{i+1} = B_i^{\rm cop, op}$.
Notice that the algebra structure is also opposite between
even and odd cases (superfluous/unvisible condition in the case of the tensor algebra $T(C_i)$ appearing in [[free Hopf algebra|Takeuchi's construction]]).
Let $\mathcal{B} = \coprod_i B_i$ and $S : \mathcal{B} \rightarrow \mathcal{B}$
be again defined by a shift in index by $+1$. Then the 2-sided
ideal $I_S \subset \mathcal{B}$ generated by relations 
$\sum b_{(1)} S(b_{(2)}) - \epsilon(b) 1$ and 
$\sum S(b_{(1)}) b_{(2)} - \epsilon(b) 1$, for all $b \in B_i$, is $S$-stable ideal and
the quotient $H(B) = \mathcal{B}/I_S$ is a Hopf algebra,
the **Hopf envelope** of bialgebra $B$.

It satisfies the following universal property:
for any Hopf algebra $H'$ and a bialgebra map
$\phi : B_0 \rightarrow H'$ there is a unique Hopf algebra
map $H(\phi) : H(B) \rightarrow H'$ such that
$H(\phi) \circ i = \phi$ where $i : B_0 \rightarrow H(B)$ is the
composition of the inclusion into $\mathcal{B}$ and the canonical projection $\mathcal{B} \rightarrow H(B)$.

Manin has introduced this construction in

* Yu. I. Manin, Quantum groups and non-commutative geometry, CRM, Montreal 1988,

and applied it mainly to matrix Hopf algebras (e.g. quantum linear groups). The Hopf envelope of the matrix Hopf algebra with basis $t^i_j$ whose underlying bialgebra is the free bialgebra on $n^2$ generators $t^i_j$ is sometimes called free matrix Hopf algebras, cf. section 13 of 

* Z. Škoda, Localizations for construction of quantum coset spaces, [math.QA/0301090](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/06/http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0301090), “Noncommutative geometry and Quantum groups”, W.Pusz, P.M. Hajac, eds. Banach Center Publications vol.61, pp. 265–298, Warszawa 2003. 

for more details.  





