+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Bundles
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include bundles - contents]]
=--
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

_Under construction_

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _octonionic Hopf fibration_ is the [[fibration]]


$$
  \array{
     S^7 &\hookrightarrow& S^15
     \\
     && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{p_{\mathbb{O}}}}
     \\
     && S^8
  }
$$

of the [[15-sphere]] over the 8-sphere with [[fiber]] the 7-sphere. This may be derived by the [[Hopf construction]] on the [[7-sphere]] $S^7$ with its [[Moufang loop]] structure.

Alternatively, we may construct a fibration by first decomposing $\mathbb{O}^2$ into the octonionic lines, 

$l_m := \{(x, m x)|x \in \mathbb{O}\}$ and $l_{\infty} := \{(0, y)|y \in \mathbb{O}\}$. 

In this way the fibration $\mathbb{O}^2 \setminus (0, 0) \to S^8 = \{m \in \mathbb{O}\} \union \{\infty\}$ is obtained, with fibers $\mathbb{O} \setminus 0$, and the intersection with the unit sphere $S^{15} \subset \mathbb{O}^2$ provides the octonionic Hopf fibration (see [OPPV, p. 7](#OPPV)).

This second construction yields the standard parameterization of the octonionic Hopf fibration via $(x,y) \mapsto x y^{-1}$ (in one chart) and $(x,y ) \mapsto x^{-1} y$ (in the other), while the Hopf construction gives $(x,y) \mapsto x y$. The latter yields the generator $-1$ of $\pi_{15}(S^8) \cong \mathbb{Z}$, while the former yields $+1$. 

## Properties
 
### $G_2$ action

The [[automorphism group]] [[G2]] of the [[octonions]], as a [[normed algebra]], manifestly acts on the octonionic Hopf fibration.

(see also [Cook-Crabb 93](#CookCrabb93))


### Spin(9) action

The subgroup $Spin(9) \subset SO(16)$ acts transitively on the octonionic Hopf fibration, which can be consider as a homogeneous fibration

$$
\frac{Spin(9)}{Spin(7)} \stackrel{\frac{Spin(8)}{Spin(7)}}{\to} \frac{Spin(9)}{Spin(8)}.
$$

## Related concepts

* [[real Hopf fibration]]

* [[complex Hopf fibration]]

* [[quaternionic Hopf fibration]]

##References

* {#OPPV} Liviu Ornea, Maurizio Parton, Paolo Piccinni, Victor Vuletescu, _Spin(9) geometry of the octonionic Hopf fibration_, ([arXiv:1208.0899](http://arxiv.org/abs/1208.0899))

* {#Miyaoka93} [[Reiko Miyaoka]], _The linear isotropy group of $G_2/SO(4)$, the Hopf fibering and isoparametric hypersurfaces_, Osaka J. Math. Volume 30, Number 2 (1993), 179-202. ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.ojm/1200784357))

Discussion in [[parameterized homotopy theory]] is in

* {#CookCrabb93} A. L. Cook, M.C. Crabb, _Fiberwise Hopf structures on sphere bundles_, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 48 (1993) 365-384 ([pdf](http://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/~aar/papers/crabbcook.pdf))

* {#Iriye95} Kouyemon Iriye, _Equivariant Hopf structures on a sphere_, J. Math. Kyoto Univ. Volume 35, Number 3 (1995), 403-412 ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.kjm/1250518704))

