pages/16986.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Bundles
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include bundles - contents]]
=--
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

_Under construction_

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _octonionic Hopf fibration_ is the [[fibration]]


$$
  \array{
     S^7 &\hookrightarrow& S^15
     \\
     && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{p_{\mathbb{O}}}}
     \\
     && S^8
  }
$$

of the [[15-sphere]] over the 8-sphere with [[fiber]] the 7-sphere. 

To construct the fibration, first we decompose $\mathbb{O}^2$ into the octonionic lines, 

$l_m := \{(x, m x)|x \in \mathbb{O}\}$ and $l_{\infty} := \{(0, y)|y \in \mathbb{O}\}$. 

In this way the fibration $\mathbb{O}^2 \setminus (0, 0) \to S^8 = \{m \in \mathbb{O}\} \union \{\infty\}$ is obtained, with fibers $\mathbb{O} \setminus 0$, and the intersection with the unit sphere $S^{15} \subset \mathbb{O}^2$ provides the octonionic Hopf fibration (see [OPPV, p. 7](#OPPV)).
 
##Spin(9) action

The subgroup $Spin(9) \subset SO(16)$ acts transitively on the octonionic Hopf fibration, which can be consider as a homogeneous fibration

$$
\frac{Spin(9)}{Spin(7)} \stackrel{\frac{Spin(8)}{Spin(7)}}{\to} \frac{Spin(9)}{Spin(8)}.
$$

## Related concepts

* [[real Hopf fibration]]

* [[complex Hopf fibration]]

* [[quaternionic Hopf fibration]]

##References

* {#OPPV} Liviu Ornea, Maurizio Parton, Paolo Piccinni, Victor Vuletescu, _Spin(9) geometry of the octonionic Hopf fibration_, ([arXiv:1208.0899](http://arxiv.org/abs/1208.0899))

Commit message:

Revision ID: 103339 Revision date: 2015-12-03 09:46:15 Page name: octonionic Hopf fibration Author: David Corfield IP address: 129.12.18.158

pages/16986.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Bundles
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include bundles - contents]]
=--
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

_Under construction_

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _octonionic Hopf fibration_ is the [[fibration]]


$$
  \array{
     S^7 &\hookrightarrow& S^15
     \\
     && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{p_{\mathbb{O}}}}
     \\
     && S^8
  }
$$

of the [[15-sphere]] over the 8-sphere with [[fiber]] the 7-sphere. This may be derived by the [[Hopf construction]] on the [[7-sphere]] $S^7$ with its [[Moufang loop]] structure.

Alternatively, we may construct a fibration by first decomposing $\mathbb{O}^2$ into the octonionic lines, 

$l_m := \{(x, m x)|x \in \mathbb{O}\}$ and $l_{\infty} := \{(0, y)|y \in \mathbb{O}\}$. 

In this way the fibration $\mathbb{O}^2 \setminus (0, 0) \to S^8 = \{m \in \mathbb{O}\} \union \{\infty\}$ is obtained, with fibers $\mathbb{O} \setminus 0$, and the intersection with the unit sphere $S^{15} \subset \mathbb{O}^2$ provides the octonionic Hopf fibration (see [OPPV, p. 7](#OPPV)).

This second construction yields the standard parameterization of the octonionic Hopf fibration via $(x,y) \mapsto x y^{-1}$ (in one chart) and $(x,y ) \mapsto x^{-1} y$ (in the other), while the Hopf construction gives $(x,y) \mapsto x y$. The latter yields the generator $-1$ of $\pi_{15}(S^8) \cong \mathbb{Z}$, while the former yields $+1$. 
 
##Spin(9) action

The subgroup $Spin(9) \subset SO(16)$ acts transitively on the octonionic Hopf fibration, which can be consider as a homogeneous fibration

$$
\frac{Spin(9)}{Spin(7)} \stackrel{\frac{Spin(8)}{Spin(7)}}{\to} \frac{Spin(9)}{Spin(8)}.
$$

## Related concepts

* [[real Hopf fibration]]

* [[complex Hopf fibration]]

* [[quaternionic Hopf fibration]]

##References

* {#OPPV} Liviu Ornea, Maurizio Parton, Paolo Piccinni, Victor Vuletescu, _Spin(9) geometry of the octonionic Hopf fibration_, ([arXiv:1208.0899](http://arxiv.org/abs/1208.0899))
