pages/17010.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Manifolds and cobordisms
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include manifolds and cobordisms - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

_Stereographic projection_ is the name for a specific [[chart]] on a [[sphere]] for the [[complement]] of a [[point]].

## Definition

Consider a (unit, say) [[sphere]] $S^n \subset \mathbb{R}^{n+1}$, and a point $v\in S^n$, considered as a vector in $\mathbb{R}^{n+1}$. Let $W\subset \mathbb{R}^{n+1}$ be the linear [[subspace]] that is the [[orthogonal complement]] to the [[linear span]] $span\{v\}$. There is a [[homeomorphism]]

$$
  \sigma \;\colon\; S^n\setminus \{v\} \stackrel{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} W
$$

given by sending a point $p\in S^n\setminus \{v\}$ to the point in $W$ that is the intersection of the line through $v$ and $p$ with $W$.

The inverse map $\sigma^{-1}$ exhibits $S^n$ as the [[one-point compactification]] of $W$.

In the case that $v=(1,0,\ldots,0)$, we have the simple formula
$$
\sigma(z,\mathbf{x}) = \frac{1}{z-1}\mathbf{x}.
$$

## Related entries

* [[Riemann sphere]]

* [[representation sphere]]


## References

* Wikipedia, _[Stereographic projection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stereographic_projection)_

Commit message:

Revision ID: 103590 Revision date: 2015-12-10 15:18:11 Page name: stereographic projection Author: David Roberts IP address: 212.159.141.106

pages/17010.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Manifolds and cobordisms
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include manifolds and cobordisms - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

_Stereographic projection_ is the name for a specific [[chart]] on a [[sphere]] for the [[complement]] of a [[point]].

## Definition

Consider a (unit, say) [[sphere]] $S^n \subset \mathbb{R}^{n+1}$, and a point $v\in S^n$, considered as a vector in $\mathbb{R}^{n+1}$. Let $W\subset \mathbb{R}^{n+1}$ be the linear [[subspace]] that is the [[orthogonal complement]] to the [[linear span]] $span\{v\}$. There is a [[homeomorphism]]

$$
  \sigma \;\colon\; S^n\setminus \{v\} \stackrel{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} W
$$

given by sending a point $p\in S^n\setminus \{v\}$ to the point in $W$ that is the intersection of the line through $v$ and $p$ with $W$.


The inverse map $\sigma^{-1}$ exhibits $S^n$ as the [[one-point compactification]] of $W$.

In the case that $v=(1,0,\ldots,0)$, then $W = \{0\}\oplus \mathbb{R}^n$ and we have the simple formula
$$
\sigma(z,\mathbf{x}) = \frac{1}{z-1}(0,\mathbf{x}).
$$


More generally, one may take for $W$ any _affine_ subspace of $\mathbb{R}^{n+1}$ normal to $span\{v\}$ and not containing $v$. For instance one option is to take $W$ to be the tangent space to $S^n$ at $-v$, embedded as a subspace of $\mathbb{R}^{n+1}$.

## Extra structure

In most cases of interest one is doing [[geometry]] using stereographic projection, so the sphere and the subspace $W$ are equipped with extra structure. Taking the explicit case above ($v=(1,0,\ldots,0)$), as the formula is so simple, some structures are automatically preserved, for instance:

* [[conformal structure]]
* orthogonal [[group action]] fixing $v,-v$ pointwise (note that these two points are sent to "$\infty$" and $0$, respectively, under $\sigma$)

## Related entries

* [[Riemann sphere]]

* [[representation sphere]]


## References

* Wikipedia, _[Stereographic projection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stereographic_projection)_
