
This is a sub-entry for [[gerbe]].

For related entries see

* [[bundle gerbe]]
* [[gerbe (general idea)]]


##Idea## 

(The definitions of [[sheaf]] and [[stack]] are elsewhere in the nLab but we will have to review them briefly. There is also  [[motivation for sheaves, cohomology and higher stacks]], which provides other insights. For simplicity of exposition, we will initially look at sheaves, stacks and gerbes over a base space $B$ rather than in the more general setting of a topos.)

Naively a [[sheaf]] is a family of sets indexed 'continuously' by the points of a space $B$.  It corresponds either to a [[presheaf]] satisfying a 'gluing condition' (which is the version of [[descent]] in one of its simplest cases), or to an [[etale space|étale space]] over $B$.  The relationship between them is that the presheaf is the presheaf of local sections of the étale space, and the 'gluing condition' is that local sections that agree on the intersections of  open sets can be glued uniquely to give a section over the union of the open sets.

An important class of sheaves are the [[torsor|torsors]].  Let $G$ be a sheaf of groups on $B$.   The category, $Tors(B;G)$ of $G$-torsors on $B$ is a groupoid.  The notion of $G$-torsor 'localises' well, so that if $U$ is an open set of $B$, then we can restrict $G$ to a sheaf on $U$, and look at the torsors over $U$ using the restricted $G$. (We abuse notation and just write $Tors(U;G)$ for the corresponding groupoid. If $V$ is another open set contained in $U$, there is a restriction functor from $Tors(U;G)$ to $Tors(V;G)$, so it looks as if we have a presheaf of groupoids on $B$, but things are not quite right here.

The assignment of $Tors(G)_U$ to $U$ only gives a [[pseudofunctor]] not a functor from the category $Open(B)^{op}$ to the category of groupoids. It thus corresponds to a [[Grothendieck fibration]] or **fibred category** over $Open(B)$.  It does have quite nice 'gluing properties' however, it is a [[stack]] of groupoids.  (Roughly 'morphisms glue, objects glue up to isomorphism'. For enlightenment note that there are almost presheaves of objects and of morphisms in this 'pseudo' presheaf.) This stack will be called $\mathcal{T}ors(G)$.

There is a **stackcompletion** functor from fibred categories to stacks.  If we take the sheaf of groups $G$, think of it as a presheaf of groupoids $BG$, in the usual way, then it is a pseudo-functor from $Open(B)^{op}$ to the category of groupoids. If we stack complete it, we get ... $\mathcal{T}ors(G)$.

We thus can think of a stack of groupoids as a 'lax' generalisation of a sheaf of groupoids.  What about **gerbes**?

(It should be mentioned that often in topological settings, the sheaf of groups is actually a constant sheaf and that in that case a $G$-torsor is just a principal $G$-bundle.)


Groups 'are' groupoids with a single object, but groupoids are not 'groups with many objects' (although that is a nice phrase to use when introducing them). A groupoid need not have any objects ... if it is empty! Of course, we think of the vertex groups of a groupoid, but, if the groupoid is not connected, there may be many different non-isomorphic ones. So a group *is* a very special type of groupoid.

Similarly, the term 'gerbe' refers to a special sort of stack of groupoids. 

+-- {: .standout}
A gerbe is to a general stack what, up to equivalence, a group is to a general groupoid. It is non-empty and connected.
=--

+--{: .query}

[[David Roberts]]: This is reflected in the fact that the fibres of bundle gerbes (either abelian or $G$-bundles gerbes) are transitive groupoids. I believe Tim and I had a bit of discussion of this sort of thing last year (or before - mists of time...). Or maybe this comment should go in [[gerbe (general idea)]]?
=--

To make this precise we use some additional notions:

We will have a pseudofunctor $F : Open(B)^{op}\to Grpd$, and this will be a stack.


##Definitions## 

*   A stack of groupoids, $F$, on $B$ is *locally non-empty* if there is an open covering $\mathcal{U}$ of $B$ for which each groupoid $F(U)$ is non-empty, for $U \in \mathcal{U}$.

*   A stack of groupoids, $F$, on $B$ is said to be *locally connected*  if there is an open covering $\mathcal{U}$ of $B$ for which each groupoid $F(U)$ is connected, for $U \in \mathcal{U}$.


and finally:

*  A *gerbe* $F$ on $B$ is a locally non-empty, locally connected stack of groupoids on $B$.


It is important to note that it does not state in the definition of a gerbe that the open cover that we have over which it is non-empty is or is not one over which it is connected.

_Local connectedness_ can be well stated by saying that for the various $U$, if $x$ and $y$ are local objects defined over $U$, the set $F(U)(x,y)$ is not empty. (Translation: a 'local object', or 'locally defined object', of $F$ is a 'local section'  of $Ob(F)$, say, over $U$, in other words, an element in $Ob(F(U))$.



## Important example## 


+-- {: .un_proposition}

###### Proposition
$\mathcal{T}ors(G)$ is a gerbe on $B$.
=--

+-- {: .proof}
######Proof
To see _locally non-empty_: If $U$ is any open set in $B$, then as $\mathcal{T}ors(G)(U) = Tors(U;G)$, the category of $G_U$-torsors over $U$, it has at least the [[trivial torsor|trivial G-torsor]] (over $U$) amongst its objects, so $\mathcal{T}ors(G)$ is locally non-empty.

Next look at $\mathcal{T}ors(G)(U)$ again.  Any two $G_U$-torsors are locally isomorphic to each other, since they are both locally isomorphic to the trivial $G_U$-torsor, so, if $F$ and $F^\prime$ are two $G_U$-torsors, there is an open cover such that over that cover $F$ and $F^\prime$ are isomorphic, hence $\mathcal{T}ors(G)$ is locally connected.  We thus have that $\mathcal{T}ors(G)$ is a gerbe.
=--


##Differential geometry

$H^3(X,\mathbb{Z})$ and $\mathcal{O}_X^*$-gerbes: [[Jean-Luc Brylinski]]'s approach

+--{: .query}
_Daniel_:Please, would someone mind explain this with detail? I am interested in understand quantization and somehow, this thing comes up all the time...
I got it from the entry on wikipedia on [gerbes,]( http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerbe) but it was not explained.

[[Tim Porter|Tim]]:  I will get there but the route is not that short! It is however not that long either.
=--


##References

There is a lengthier description of gerbes (at this level of generality) in the Menagerie notes that are available from [[Tim Porter|Tim Porter's]] home page.

Other material available online includes the following:

* I. Moerdijk, _Introduction to the language of stacks and gerbes_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0212266))

* Larry Breen, _Notes on 1- and 2-gerbes_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0611317))

Further references are given in the other entries on gerbes.
