#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Abstract

We present a short and simple (modulo those foundational results on closed, connected, orientable 3-manifolds which allow for these to be viewed diagramatically, as framed links up to local Kirby moves and the framed Reidemeister moves) proof of the Poincaré conjecture, by means of a certain quotient of the free group on the arcs of a link diagram.

_The current article is under construction. Those parts which are written are complete, except that none of links to figures work at present. The full proof, typeset only in plain text (unicode) but with figures (such as are possible in plain text!), is available from the author by email in the meantime._  

## Preliminaries ##

### Kirby equivalence ###

The _framed Reidemeister moves_ on a link diagram are depicted [here](http://rwilliamson-mathematics.info/poincare_conjecture/nforum/framed_reidemeister_moves.pdf).

The _Kirby moves_ on a link diagram are depicted [here](http://rwilliamson-mathematics.info/poincare_conjecture/nforum/kirby_moves.pdf).

A pair of link diagrams are _Kirby equivalent_ if there is a finite sequence of framed Reidemeister moves and Kirby moves taking one to the other.

### Fundamental theorems on 3-manifolds

We shall rely on the following fundamental theorems, which allow for a diagrammatic approach to the Poincaré conjecture.

+-- {: .un_thm}
###### Theorem (Lickorish-Wallace)

Let $M$ be a closed, connected, orientable 3-manifold. There is a link diagram $L$ such that $M$ is isomorphic to the 3-manifold obtained by the integral Dehn surgery on $L$ in $S^{3}$ with respect to the blackboard framing of $L$.

=--

+-- {: .un_thm}
###### Theorem (Kirby)

Let $M_{0}$ and $M_{1}$ be closed, connected, orientable 3-manifolds. Let $L_{0}$ (respectively $L_{1}$) be a link diagram such that the 3-manifold obtained by the integral Dehn surgery on $L_{0}$ (respectively $L_{1}$) in $S^{3}$ with respect to the blackboard framing of $L_{0}$ (respectively $L_{1}$). Then $M_{0}$ is isomorphic to $M_{1}$ if and only if $L_{0}$ and $L_{1}$ are Kirby equivalent.

=--

### Fundamental group of a link diagram 

Let $L$ be a link diagram, with some choice of orientation. We denote the free group on the arcs of $L$ by $F(L)$. 

We define $\pi_{1}(L)$, the fundamental group of $L$, to be the quotient of $F(L)$ by the normal subgroup generated by words of the form $a_3 a_2^{-1} a_1^{-1} a_2$, for any crossing of $L$ as depicted [here](http://rwilliamson-mathematics.info/poincare_conjecture/nforum/labelled_crossing.pdf).

### Longitude of the component of a link diagram 

Let $L$ be a link diagram, with some choice of orientation. The longitude of a component of $L$ is defined to be the word $w$ which we obtain after carrying out the following procedure. 

1. Pick any arc of $L$, say $a$. Let $w$ be the empty word.
2. Walk around $L$, following the orientation. When we walk under an arc $b$, whether or not $b$ belongs to same component of $L$ or a different one, we add $b$ to the end of $w$ if the configuration of orientations at the crossing is as depicted in the first figure [here](http://rwilliamson-mathematics.info/poincare_conjecture/nforum/longitude_add.pdf), and add $b^{-1}$ to the end of $w$ if the configuration of orientations at the crossing is as depicted in the second figure [here](http://rwilliamson-mathematics.info/poincare_conjecture/nforum/longitude_add_inverse.pdf).
3. Stop when we return to the arc we started with, namely $a$.

The following is a consequence of the van Kampen theorem.

+-- {: .un_prop}
###### Proposition

Let $M$ be a closed, connected, orientable 3-manifold. Let $L$ be a link diagram such that the 3-manifold obtained by the integral Dehn surgery on $L$ in $S^{3}$ with respect to the blackboard framing of $L$ is isomorphic to $M$. Then the group $\pi_{1}(M)$ is isomorphic to the group $\pi_{1}(L) / \langle l_1, \ldots, l_n \rangle$, where $l_1$, $\ldots$, $l_{n}$ are the longitudes of the components of $L$, and $\langle l_1, \ldots, l_n \rangle$ is the normal subgroup generated by these.  

=--

### Diagrammatic formulation of the Poincaré conjecture

Let $M$ be a closed, connected $3$-manifold. The _Poincaré conjecture_ is that if $\pi_{1}(M)$ is trivial (that is to say, isomorphic to a group with one element), then $M$ is isomorphic to $S^{3}$. 

If $\pi_{1}(M)$ is trivial, then $M$ is orientable. It thus follows from the Lickorish-Wallace theorem, the Kirby theorem, the preceding proposition, and the fact that integral Dehn surgery on the empty link diagram gives $S^{3}$, that the Poincaré conjecture is equivalent to the following: if a link diagram $L$ has the property that the group $\pi_{1}(L) / \langle l_1, \ldots, l_n \rangle$ is trivial, then $L$ is Kirby equivalent to the empty link diagram.

## Dénouement ##

We present the conclusion of our argument first. Afterwards, we will present the missing pieces.

Let $L$ be a link diagram, and let $F(L)$ be the free group on the arcs of $L$. Suppose that we have defined a normal subgroup $N$ of $F(L)$ with the following properties.

1. The group $F(L) / N$ is a quotient of the group $\pi_{1} / \langle l_1, \ldots, l_n \rangle$.

2. Let $a$ be an arc of $L$. If $a$ belongs to $N$, then $L$ is Kirby equivalent to a link diagram with strictly fewer components. 

We can then carry out the following inductive argument.

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof of the Poincaré conjecture

Suppose that  $\pi_{1} / \langle l_1, \ldots, l_n \rangle$ is trivial. Then, by 1., we have that $F(L) / N$ is trivial. Hence every element of $F(L)$ belongs to $N$. 

Let $a$ be any arc of $L$. By the preceding observation, we have that $a$ belongs to $N$. By 2.,we deduce that $L$ is Kirby equivalent to a link diagram $L'$ with strictly fewer components. 

Since $L'$ is Kirby equivalent to $L$, we have that $\pi_{1}(L') / \langle l'_1, \ldots, l'_n' \rangle$, where $l'_1$, $\ldots$, $l'_n'$ are the longitudes of the components of $L'$, is isomorphic to $\pi_{1} / \langle l_1, \ldots, l_n \rangle$. Since the latter is trivial, we deduce that $\pi_{1}(L') / \langle l'_1, \ldots, l'_n' \rangle$ is trivial. Thus we can give the same argument for $L'$ as we did for $L$.

In this way, we obtain a sequence $L$, $L'$, $\ldots$ of link diagrams, all Kirby equivalent to $L$, and such that each link diagram appearing has strictly fewer components than the link diagram immediately preceding it. By induction, we conclude that $L$ is Kirby equivalent to the empty link diagram.

=--

## Definition of $N$

As our first missing piece, we shall define $N$, as a subset of the set of words in the arcs of $L$. 

### Operator equivalence to the identity

Here, and throughout the remainder of this article, I shall refer to local pieces of a link diagram, $L'$ say, some arcs of which are labelled by arcs of a link diagram, $L$ say, from which $L'$ can be obtained by a finite sequence of $\mathsf{R2}$ and $\mathsf{R3}$ moves. We defer a precise definition of this labelling until the very end of this article; to understand the definition of $N$, this precise definition is not needed, but it is needed for some of the arguments that will come later.

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition (Operator equivalence to the identity) 

Let $L$ be a link diagram, and let $w = a_1^{\pm 1} ... a_n^{\pm 1}$ be a word in the arcs of L. Then $w$ is _operator equivalent to the identity_ if, for every arc a of L, there is a link diagram L_a such that the following hold:

1. $L_a$ can be be obtained from $L$ by a finite sequence of $\mathsf{R2}$ and $\mathsf{R3}$ moves;

2. there is a local piece of $L_a$ which, after removing all fragments of the arc $a$ which cross over the horizontal arcs between the $a_i$'s, looks as depicted [here](http://rwilliamson-mathematics.info/poincare_conjecture/nforum/operator_equivalence.pdf), for some $n \geq 1$, and for some choice of orientation.

=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Remark 

The requirement that $n \geq 1$ in 2. means that there must be at least one vertical arc in the figure after removing all fragments of the arc $a$ which cross over the horizontal arcs between the $a_i$'s. In other words, we do not allow that $a_{i}$ is either $a$ or $a^{-1}$ for all $1 \leq i \leq n$.

The terminology _operator equivalence to the identity_ is inspired by the notion of this name which appears in the theory of racks. 

=--

### Definition of $N$

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition ($N$)

Let $L$ be a link diagram, and let $w$ be a word in the arcs of $L$. Then we define $w$ to belong to $N$ if one of the following holds.

1. We have that $L$ is Kirby equivalent to a link diagram with strictly fewer components.

2. We have that, for every distinct $a_i$ which occurs in $w$, there are as many occurrences of $a_i$ as of $a_i^{-1}$. We include the empty word as a vacuous case of this.

3. We have that $w$ is of the form $w_1 \cdot w_2 \cdot ... \cdot w_n$ for some $n \geq 1$, where, for each $i$, $w_i$ is operator equivalent to the identity, in the sense defined above.

For any word $w$ in the arcs of $L$ for which both $w$ and $w^-1$ are operator equivalent to the identity, we identify $w \cdot w^-1$ and $w^-1 \cdot w$ with the empty word. In other words, we define $N$ to be the quotient, by the equivalence relation generated by the latter identifications, of the set of words which belong to $N$ by virtue of 1., 2., and 3..

=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Remark 

Note that if we view $N$ as a subset of $F(L)$, then every word satisfying 2. is equal to the empty word, so that 2. simply asserts that the empty word belongs to $N$.

=--

### Proof of one of the two facts relied upon in the dénouement

In the proof of the Poincaré conjecture given above, we relied on two facts, one of which was the following. It follows more or less immediately from the definition of $N$, as we demonstrate below.

+-- {: .un_prop}
###### Proposition

Let $b$ be an arc of $L$. If $b$ belongs to $N$, then $L$ is Kirby equivalent to a link diagram with strictly fewer components. 

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Since the word $w=b$ consists of a single arc $b$ which occurs once, without $b^{-1}$ occurring, 2. in the definition of $N$ cannot hold for $w$. 

Moreover, because of the requirement that $n \geq 1$, the condition for a word to be operator equivalent to the identity does not hold for $w=b$ in the case that we take the arc $a$ in the definition of the operator equivalence to the identity to be $b$. Thus 3. in the definition of $N$ cannot hold for $w$.

We conclude that 1. in the definition of $N$ holds for $w$. This is exactly what we needed to show.

=--