## Idea

An $(n,k)$-transformation is an operation from one $n$-[[n-category|category]] $C$ to another $D$ that takes [[object]]s of $C$ to $k$-[[k-morphism|morphism]]s of $D$ (and more generally $j$-morphisms in $C$ to $(j+k)$-morphisms in $D$) in a coherent way.

This is a common generalisation of $n$-[[n-functor|functor]]s (which are $(n,0)$-transformations), [[natural transformation]]s (which are $(1,1)$-transformations), [[modification]]s (which are $(2,2)$-transformations), and others.

+-- {: .query}
_Sebastian_: I have just begun to learn about $2$-categories and all the $j$-morphisms in $2Cat$ (everything strict, for the beginning). Now I am confused about this entry in the nlab.

What do you mean exactly by an "operation"? Let's take $2Cat$. I thought
- a $2$-functor (= functor = $(2, 0)$-transformation) $F: C \to D$ would consist of three maps, $Ob C \to Ob D$, $Mor C \to Mor D$ and $Mor_2 C \to Mor_2 D$,
- a transformation (= $(2, 1)$-transformation) $a: F \to G$, where $F, G: C \to D$, would consist only of one map $Ob C \to Mor D$,
- a modification (= $(2, 2)$-transformation) $m: a \to b$, where $a, b: F \to G$ and $F, G: C \to D$, would consist of one map $Ob C \to Mor_2 D$.

So a functor would consist of three maps, while a transformation and a modification would only consist of one. Now there are two possibilities coming to my mind: Either my definition of a transformation is wrong (do they consist of two maps $Ob C \to Mor D$ and $Mor C \to Mor_2 D$?) or the functors do not really fit into this concept (only their "maps on the objects" would do). You write that an $(n, k)$-morphism takes objects of $C$ to $k$-morphisms of $D$ - what about higher $j$-morphisms in $C$?

Do you now a good modern account to these things?

_Toby_ replies:  Yes, a natural transformation between $2$-categories *does* also include a map $Mor C \to Mor_2 D$ as you guessed; more precisely, the naturality square is filled by a $2$-morphism instead of by an equality.  In your study of *strict* $2$-categories, however, you probably don\'t notice this, because this $2$-morphism is required to be an [[identity morphism|identity]] in a *strict* natural transformation.  (See [[lax natural transformation]] for the more general concept of transformation between *weak* $2$-categories.)  Also, I\'ve added a note about what happens to the $j$-morphisms in general.

Hopefully, Urs will chime in with a reference for his comments in the ##Discussion## below, or else tell us that it was original research.  I don\'t know a reference myself.

[[Urs Schreiber]]: what I write in the discussion below is not original research but "well known", though as it goes with well known things, they can still be pretty little known.

For the case of strict globular $n$-categories this is all in the work of Sjoerd Crans that is referenced at [[Crans-Gray tensor product]]. But that's a admittedly bit hard to read if one is just interested in understanding this for 2-categories. We should spell that case out here in full detail.

For the simplicial case, by the way, this is even simpler and even more well known. I mean the internal hom for simplicial sets. And that produces the right hom-objects for most all [[geometric definition of higher category]], certainly for [[quasicategory|quasicategories]].

As a references for strict 2-functors etc. you have to excuse me if the appendix of [this](http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/arxiv/pdf/0802/0802.0663v2.pdf#page=60) comes to my mind first. That at least is guaranteed to have the pictures that we are looking for in the context of the present discussion.

_Sebastian_: Thank you very much for your comments! This was really helpful!

_Toby_:  You\'re welcome.  (And you *are* welcome.  You are on the [[Contributors|list of contributors]] now, from which you can make a page for yourself too; please add material or ask questions as you feel inspired to!)
=--


## Terminological note

Once upon a time, there were [[categories]], [[functor]]s between them, and natural transformations between them.  Then when $n$-categories came along, people called the arrows between them ‘$n$-functors’ even though one could just as easily say 'functors'.  In the same vein, people said ‘$n$-transformations’.  At the same time, we saw that we needed modifications between $2$-transformations, and that there would have to be things between higher modifications, and so on.

Since we don\'t really need the prefix ‘$n$-’ above except on 'category', we could drop that, then use ‘$k$-transformation’ for an element of the series (category, functor, transformation, modification, ...).  Unfortunately, many people have not dropped the ‘$n$-’, so this would conflict with their usage of ‘$n$-transformation’ (to mean $(n,1)$-transformation).  Therefore we reluctantly say ‘$(n, k)$-transformation’ instead.


## Definitions

We haven\'t gotten around to saying anything precise yet, but you can see something in the discussion below.


## Special cases

See this [[periodic table]] of $(n,k)$-transformations for common names for low values of $n$ and $k$.  In the Lab, we tend to omit the prefixes whenever possible.

<table markdown="1"><tr><th>$k$↓\$n$→</th><th>$-1$</th><th>$0$</th><th>$1$</th><th>$2$</th><th>$3$</th><th>...</th></tr>
<tr><th>$0$</th><td>[[implication]]</td><td>[[function]]</td><td>[[functor]]</td><td>$2$-[[2-functor|functor]]</td><td>$3$-[[n-functor|functor]]</td><td>...</td></tr>
<tr><th>$1$</th><td>trivial</td><td>[[equality]] of functions</td><td>[[natural transformation]]</td><td>$2$-transformation</td><td>$3$-transformation</td><td>...</td></tr>
<tr><th>$2$</th><td>\"</td><td>trivial</td><td>equality of natural transformations</td><td>[[modification]]</td><td>$3$-modification</td><td>...</td></tr>
<tr><th>$3$</th><td>\"</td><td>\"</td><td>trivial</td><td>equality of modifications</td><td>perturbation</td><td>...</td></tr>
<tr><th>$4$</th><td>\"</td><td>\"</td><td>\"</td><td>trivial</td><td>equality of perturbations</td><td>...</td></tr>
<tr><th>$5$</th><td>\"</td><td>\"</td><td>\"</td><td>\"</td><td>trivial</td><td>...</td></tr>
<tr><th>⋮</th><td>\"</td><td>\"</td><td>\"</td><td>\"</td><td>\"</td><td>⋱</td></tr></table>

Note that the [[source]] and [[target]] of an $(n,k)$-transformation are $(n,k-1)$-transformations.  Given fixed source and target, the $(n,k)$-transformations between them form an $(n-k)$-category.


## Discussion ##

This discussion was originally at [[modification]].  It discusses both terminology and definitions.

+-- {: .query}
[[Finn Lawler|Finn]]: There is a pattern here: functors
are indexed collections of objects, natural
transformations are i.c.s of 1-cells, modifications i.c.s
of 2-cells; and these are what make the collection of all
$n$-categories into an $n+1$-category, for $0 \leq n \leq
2$ anyway.  Any references for the pattern in higher
dimensions?

_Toby_:  Do you mean for the terminology or for the appropriate coherence laws? (the details that you\'ve been leaving out).  Not that I have either ...

Incidentally, I corrected 'function' to 'functor' in you question above; I hope that\'s OK.

[[Finn Lawler|Finn]]:  I meant terminology and/or an explanation for arbitrary $n$ (which Urs gives below).

Actually I was thinking of functions rather than functors, as they are the 1-cells in $0-Cat$.  But of course functions are just functors between discrete categories, and thinking of them as the latter probably makes more sense when moving to higher dimensions.

_Toby_:  Now, I would either have said 'functors are indexed collections of objects' or 'functions are indexed collections of elements'; your mixture confused me!  (^_^)

_Finn_:  Ah!  Point taken.  In any case, I should have said '0-cell' instead of 'object'.  But I think 'functor' is better anyway, as I said.

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: the pattern that Finn is looking for is that embodied in the nature of the [[internal hom]] of the [[closed monoidal structure on presheaves]].

In its most general form, consider an [[infinity-category]] modeled as a [[simplicial set]] with certain properties. Being a simplicial set, this is a presheaf on the [[simplex category]]. Hence for $X$ and $Y$ such $\infty$-categories, the $\infty$-category of morphisms between them corresponds to the internal hom simplicial set
$$
  [X,Y] = Hom_{SSet}(X \times \Delta^\bullet, Y)
  \,.
$$

This simple formula encodes that pattern that Finn observed. It says that:

* [[functor]]s (the 0-cells in $[X,Y]$) are just maps $X \to Y$ from cells to cells;

* [[natural transformation]]s (the 1-cells in $[X,Y]$) are maps $X \times \Delta^1 \to Y$. Notice that $\Delta^1$ is the [[interval object]] in $SSet$ (or at least its Kanification is, but never mind that for the moment). Such maps send $n$-cells in $X$ to $(n+1)$-cells in $Y$.

* modifications are maps $X \times \Delta^2 \to Y$, that map $n$-cells in $X$ to $(n+2)$-cells in $Y$.

It may be helpful to realize the same pattern in the globular context of, for instance, [[strict omega-category]]. These are certain presheaves not on the [[simplex category]] but on the [[globe category]], but the pattern is the same: the [[internal hom]] strict $\omega$-category of morphisms between strict $\omega$-categories $X$ and $Y$ is
$$
  [X,Y] = Hom_{\omega Cat}(X \otimes G^\bullet , Y)
  \,,
$$
where now the tensor product appearing is no longer the cartesian one but the [[Crans-Gray tensor product]] and where $G^n$ is the standard globular $n$-globe. Again $G^1$ is a model for the [[interval object]] and we see that

* functors are morphisms $X \to Y$;

* transformations are morphisms $X \otimes G^1 \to Y$

* modifications are morphisms $X \otimes G^2 \to Y$

etc. Same logic as before.

When thinking about this, it may be useful to explicitly apply the hom-adjunction everywhere and think for instance of a natural transformation as a morphism

$$
  X \to [I,Y]
$$

from $X$ into the "category of cylinders in $Y$". This is maybe the most intuitive way: if for instance $Y$ happens to be just a 2-category, then this says that a transformation between functors between 2-categories is a 1-functor from the 1-category underlying $X$ to the category of cylinders in $Y$ (satisfying some property). Which is exactly what it is, in components.

When in a certain mood, I like to think of this basic fact, that $n$-fold transformations between $k$-functors are essentially (in components) $(k-n)$-functors with values in $n$-cylinders as the "holographic principle" in category theory. That may sound a bit silly, but it is true that in the case the $k$-functors in questions are $k$-functors on $Bord_k$ respresenting $k$-dimensional [[quantum field theory]], then teir transformations, being $(k-1)$-functors, represent $(k-1)$-dim QFT, and this relation between higher and lower dim QFT is called "holography" in phyiscs.

[[Finn Lawler|Finn]]:  Cool!  Thanks, Urs.  I might move this section to an article on $n$-[[n-transformation|transformations]] (if that's what they're called) once I get my head around it properly.

_Toby_:  Unfortunately, ‘$n$-transformation’ already (following ‘$n$-functor’) means a transformation between functors between $n$-categories.  See [Cheng--Gurski](http://cheng.staff.shef.ac.uk/degeneracy/cheng-gurski-degeneracy.pdf) for this, along with ‘$n$-modification’ and even ‘$n$-perturbation’ (gee, that doesn\'t conflict with anything else, does it?), along with the claim that there is 'no existing terminology' thereafter.

I would probably say ‘$n$-morphism in $n Cat$’ (possibly with two different values of $n$); you can use ‘$n$-cell’ in place of ‘$n$-morphism’ if you like.  But it would be nice to find something more specific that\'s not already taken.  Or we could just throw out the Cheng--Gurski meaning of ‘$n$-transformation’; although it\'s not unique to them, it may not be too entrenched yet.

(But please let a transformation be a $1$-transformation, even though it is a $2$-morphism.)

[[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: I think what Urs and Crans both may be suggesting is that, at least in the context of strict $n$- and $\omega$-categories, there is a uniform notion of "transformation of depth k between n-functors", or just $(n, k)$-transformations, where $(n, 1)$-transformations are usual transformations between $n$-functors, $(n, 2)$-transformations are modifications, and so on. Surely this usage won't conflict with Cheng-Gurski. 

_Toby_:  Yeah, that would work, so we could write [[(n,k)-transformation]].  My only disgruntlement is that the $n$ is superfluous; the problem is all those other people that are already using it and preventing us from unambiguously saying simply ‘$k$-transformation’!

_Finn_: Probably tiros like me shouldn't have a say in this sort of thing, but I would tend to agree with Toby here, that the $k$ is at least more interesting than the $n$, in that you're more likely to vary the values of $k$ than those of $n$.  However, typing the few extra characters does seem a small price to pay to avoid horrible confusion.  I slightly reluctantly vote for $(n,k)$. 

_Todd_: I'm not crazy about it either, but I agree it's a small price. I'll note (in case it helps) that in the general theory of Crans-Gray tensor products, both variations in $n$ and $k$ come up, about equally often (e.g., the tensor of a 1-category and an $n$-category is an $(n+1)$-category). 

[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: yes, so to summarize what I think the main points are

* there is a systematic notion of "transformation of depth k between n-functors" for [[geometric definition of higher category]] in terms of simplicial sets;

* the corresponding notion in the (strict) globular context is formalized by Crans' construction;

* unwrapping what this says, it yields in particular that a transformation of depth $k$ between strict globular $n$-categories $X$ and $Y$ is an $(n-k)$-functor from the truncation $X{\leq k}$ of $X$ to an $(n-k)$-category (throwing all higher cells away) to the $(n-k)$-category of $k$-globes in $Y$ (also truncated)
$$
  \eta : X_{\leq k} \to [G^k, Y]|_{\leq k}
$$
satisfying certain naturality conditions (which ensure precisely that $\eta$ extends uniquely to an $n$-functor
$
  \eta : X \to [G^k,Y]
$). 

JCMcKeown: not meaning to cause annoyance, but how about calling them "$+k$-transformations", owing to their incrementing dimensions by $k$; or if we don't like the $+$ prefix, one might call them $k$-vexilors, because they tend to generate flags of period $k$.
=--


[[!redirects (n,j)-transformation]]
[[!redirects j-transformation]]
[[!redirects k-transformation]]
[[!redirects n-transformation]]
[[!redirects (n,j)-transformations]]
[[!redirects (n,k)-transformations]]
[[!redirects j-transformations]]
[[!redirects k-transformations]]
[[!redirects n-transformations]]