pages/17114.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
#### Higher linear algebra
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[smash product]] on [[pointed topological spaces]] induces a smash product on [[spectra]].

This is the canonical [[tensor product]] in the [[symmetric monoidal (infinity,1)-category of spectra]]. There are various [[model category]] [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presentations]] for which which are symmetric [[monoidal model categories]] (such as the [[highly structured spectra]]: [[S-modules]], [[symmetric spectra]] and [[orthogonal spectra]], but also for instance [[excisive functors]]). See at _[[symmetric monoidal category of spectra]]_ for more on this. Passing to the [[stable homotopy category]], it become a [[symmetric monoidal category]] under the smash product. Under mild assumptions, this is the essentially unique symmetric tensor product with [[unit]] the [[sphere spectrum]] ([Shipley 01](#Shipley01)).

Historically the discussion proceeded in the opposite direction: available variants of the construction of smash products on [[sequential spectra]] (the "handicrafted" or "naive" smash products [Boardman 65](#Boardman65), [Adams 74, part III, section 4](#Adams74)) were found to yield a [[symmetric monoidal category]] structure _only_ after passage to the [[stable homotopy category]]. Then models via non-sequential [[highly structured spectra]] were discovered wich do admit a [[symmetric smash product of spectra]] in the sense of 1-category theory, as do [[excisive functors]], see at _[[model structure on excisive functors]]_.

## Definitions

* _[smash product of excisive functors](model+structure+for+excisive+functors#SmashProduct)_

* _[smash product of symmetric spectra](symmetric+spectrum#SmashProduct)_

* _[smash product of orthogonal spectra](orthogonal+spectrum#SmashProduct)_


## References

The original "handicrafted" constructions of the smash product on the [[stable homotopy category]] are due to

* {#Boardman65} [[Michael Boardman]], _Stable homotopy theory_, mimeographed notes, University of Warwick, 1965 onwards

* [[Rainer Vogt]], _Boardman's stable homotopy category_, lectures, spring 1969

* {#Puppe73} [[Dieter Puppe]], _On the stable homotopy category_, Topology and its application (1973)  ([[PuppeStableHomotopyCategory.pdf:file]])

* {#Adams74} [[Frank Adams]], part III, section 4 of _[[Stable homotopy and generalised homology]]_, 1974

The [[symmetric smash product on spectra]] (see there for more) on [[highly structured ring spectra]] is discussed for instance in

* {#ElmendorfKrizMay95} [[Anthony Elmendorf]], [[Igor Kriz]], [[Peter May]], _[[Modern foundations for stable homotopy theory]]_, in [[Ioan Mackenzie James]], _[[Handbook of Algebraic Topology]]_, Amsterdam: North-Holland, (1995) pp. 213–253,  ([pdf](http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/Elmendorf-Kriz-May/modern_foundations.pdf))

* {#Schwede12} [[Stefan Schwede]], _Symmetric spectra_, 2012 ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/schwede/SymSpec-v3.pdf))

The uniqueness of the smash product on spectra is discussed in

* {#Shipley01} [[Brooke Shipley]], _Monoidal uniqueness of Stable homotopy theory_, Advances in Mathematics Volume 160, Issue 2, 25 June 2001, Pages 217–240 ([pdf](http://homepages.math.uic.edu/~bshipley/ideal.pdf))

[[!redirects smash products of spectra]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 105709 Revision date: 2016-02-16 09:40:02 Page name: smash product of spectra Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 89.204.137.81

pages/17114.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
#### Higher linear algebra
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

### General

The [[smash product]] on [[pointed topological spaces]] induces a smash product on [[spectra]].

This is the canonical [[tensor product]] in the [[symmetric monoidal (infinity,1)-category of spectra]]. There are various [[model category]] [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presentations]] for which which are symmetric [[monoidal model categories]] (such as the [[highly structured spectra]]: [[S-modules]], [[symmetric spectra]] and [[orthogonal spectra]], but also for instance [[excisive functors]]). See at _[[symmetric monoidal category of spectra]]_ for more on this. Passing to the [[stable homotopy category]], it become a [[symmetric monoidal category]] under the smash product. Under mild assumptions, this is the essentially unique symmetric tensor product with [[unit]] the [[sphere spectrum]] ([Shipley 01](#Shipley01)).

### History

Historically the discussion proceeded in the opposite direction: available variants of the construction of smash products on [[sequential spectra]] (the "handicrafted" or "naive" smash products [Boardman 65](#Boardman65), [Adams 74, part III, section 4](#Adams74)) were found to yield a [[symmetric monoidal category]] structure _only_ after passage to the [[stable homotopy category]]. Then models via non-sequential [[highly structured spectra]] were discovered wich do admit a [[symmetric smash product of spectra]] in the sense of 1-category theory, as do [[excisive functors]], see at _[[model structure on excisive functors]]_.

### As Day convolution spectra

Many versions of the smash product of spectra, [[symmetric smash product of spectra|symmetric or not]], arise as [[Day convolution]] products on a suitable [[enriched category|enriched]] [[monoidal category|monoidal]] version of a [[category]] of "index spaces".

The [[symmetric smash product of spectra]] on, in particular,  [[symmetric spectra]] and  [[orthogonal spectra]] is the Day convolution product for [[Top]]-[[enriched functors]] on monoidal categories of [[symmetric groups]] of [[orthogonal groups]], respectively ([MMSS 00, theorem 1.7 and section 21.](#MMSS00)).

Similarly the [[symmetric smash product of spectra]] on the [[model structure for excisive functors]] is Day convolution for [[sSet]]-[[enriched functors]] on the plain [[smash product]] of finite pointed [[simplicial sets]] ([Lydakis 98](#Lydakis98)).

See also at _[[functor with smash products]]_.

## Definitions

* _[smash product of excisive functors](model+structure+for+excisive+functors#SmashProduct)_

* _[smash product of symmetric spectra](symmetric+spectrum#SmashProduct)_

* _[smash product of orthogonal spectra](orthogonal+spectrum#SmashProduct)_


## References

The original "handicrafted" constructions of the smash product on the [[stable homotopy category]] are due to

* {#Boardman65} [[Michael Boardman]], _Stable homotopy theory_, mimeographed notes, University of Warwick, 1965 onwards

* [[Rainer Vogt]], _Boardman's stable homotopy category_, lectures, spring 1969

* {#Puppe73} [[Dieter Puppe]], _On the stable homotopy category_, Topology and its application (1973)  ([[PuppeStableHomotopyCategory.pdf:file]])

* {#Adams74} [[Frank Adams]], part III, section 4 of _[[Stable homotopy and generalised homology]]_, 1974

The [[symmetric smash product on spectra]] (see there for more) on [[highly structured ring spectra]] is discussed for instance in

for [[S-modules]]:

* {#ElmendorfKrizMay95} [[Anthony Elmendorf]], [[Igor Kriz]], [[Peter May]], _[[Modern foundations for stable homotopy theory]]_, in [[Ioan Mackenzie James]], _[[Handbook of Algebraic Topology]]_, Amsterdam: North-Holland, (1995) pp. 213–253,  ([pdf](http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/Elmendorf-Kriz-May/modern_foundations.pdf))

for [[symmetric spectra]]:

* {#Schwede12} [[Stefan Schwede]], _Symmetric spectra_, 2012 ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/schwede/SymSpec-v3.pdf))

Discussion of the smash product as a suitable [[Day convolution]] is, for [[highly structured spectra]], in

* {#MMSS00} [[Michael Mandell]], [[Peter May]], [[Stefan Schwede]], [[Brooke Shipley]], _Model Categories of Diagram Spectra_, Proceedings London Mathematical Society Volume 82, Issue 2, 2000 ([pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/PAPERS/mmssLMSDec30.pdf), [publisher](http://plms.oxfordjournals.org/content/82/2/441.short?rss=1&ssource=mfc))

and for [[excisive functors]] in

* {#Lydakis98} Lydakis, _Simplicial functors and stable homotopy theory_ Preprint, available via Hopf archive, 1998 ([pdf](http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/Lydakis/s_functors.pdf))



The uniqueness of the smash product on spectra is discussed in

* {#Shipley01} [[Brooke Shipley]], _Monoidal uniqueness of Stable homotopy theory_, Advances in Mathematics Volume 160, Issue 2, 25 June 2001, Pages 217–240 ([pdf](http://homepages.math.uic.edu/~bshipley/ideal.pdf))

[[!redirects smash products of spectra]]
