pages/17149.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

This page collects links related to

* [[John Frank Adams]], 

  _Stable homotopy and generalized homology_, 

  Chicago Lectures in mathematics, 1974


on [[complex cobordism cohomology theory|complex]] [[cobordism theory]], [[complex oriented cohomology theory]], and the [[Adams spectral sequence]]/[[Adams-Novikov spectral sequence]].

Consists of three lectures, each meant to be readable on its own, and there is overlap in topics. It's part III that begins with an actual introduction to stable homotopy theory, and the so the beginner might prefer to start reading with Part III.

The big story emerging here was later further developed in

* [[Mike Hopkins]], _[[Complex oriented cohomology theories and the language of stacks]]_, 1999

* [[Doug Ravenel]], _[[Complex cobordism and stable homotopy groups of spheres]]_, 1986/2003

* [[Jacob Lurie]], _[[Chromatic Homotopy Theory]]_, 2010

This is about understanding the absolute base space [[Spec(S)]] by [[covering]] it by Spec([[MU]]). See at _[Adams spectral sequences -- As derived descent](Adams%20spectral%20sequence#DefinitionInHigherAlgebra)_.

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Part I

* [[cobordism ring]]

* [[cobordism theory]]

* [[Novikov operations]]

* [[Umkehr map]]

## Part II -- Quillen's work on formal groups and complex cobordism
 {#PartII}

### 0. Introduction

### 1. Formal groups

* [[formal group law]]

### 2. Examples from algebraic topology

* [[complex oriented cohomology theory]]

* generalized [[Chern classes]]

### 3. Reformulation

* [[coalgebra]]

* [[Hopf algebra]]

### 4. Calculations in $E$-homology and cohomology

* [[universal coefficient theorem]]

* [[universal complex orientation on MU]] (Lemma 4.6, example 4.7)

### 5. Lazard's universal ring

* [[Lazard ring]]

### 6. More calculations in $E$-cohomology

* [[Hurewicz homomorphism]]

* [[ordinary homology spectra split]]

* [[homology of MU]]

### 7. The structure of Lazard's universal ring $L$

* [[Lazard's theorem]]

### 8. Quillen's theorem

* [[Quillen's theorem on MU]]


### 9. Corollaries

### 10. Various formulae in $\pi_\bullet(MU)$

### 11. $MU_\bullet(MU)$

* [[Landweber-Novikov theorem]]

### 12. Behaviour of the Bott map

### 13. $K_\bullet(K)$

### 14. The Hattori-Stong theorem

### 15. Quillen's idempotent cohomology operations

### 16. The Brown-Peterson spectrum

* [[BP]]

### 17. $KO_\bullet(KO)$



## Part III
 {#PartIII}

### 1. Introduction

* [[smash product]] (of [[pointed topological spaces]])

### 2. Spectra

* [[spectrum]]

* [[Omega spectrum]]

* [[suspension spectrum]]

* [[Thom spectrum]]

* [[Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]]

* [[topological K-theory]]

* [[suspension spectrum]]

* [[Thom spectrum]]

* [[cylinder spectrum]]

* [[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]]

* [[stable homotopy category]]

* [[cup product]]

* [[CW-spectrum]]


### 3. Elementary properties of the category of CW-spectra

### 4. Smash products

* [[smash product of spectra]]

### 5. Spanier-Whitehead duality

* [[Spanier-Whitehead duality]]

### 6. Homology and cohomology

* [[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]]

* [[Brown's representability theorem]]

* [[stable cohomotopy]]

* [[stable homotopy groups of spheres]]

* [[topological K-theory]]

### 7. The Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence

* [[exact couple]]

* [[spectral sequence]]

* [[Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence]]

### 8. The inverse limit and its derived functors

* [[derived functor]], [[homotopy limit]]

### 9. Products

* [[cup product]]

### 10. Duality in manifolds

* [[ring spectrum]], [[module spectrum]]

### 11. Applications in K-theory

### 12. The Steenrod algebra and its dual

* [[Steenrod algebra]]

### 13. A universal coefficient theorem

* [[universal coefficient theorem]]

### 14. A category of fractions

* [[category of fractions]]

### 15. The Adams spectral sequence

* [[Adams spectral sequence]]

### 16. Applications to $\pi_\bullet(bu \wedge X)$; modules over $K[x,y]$

### 17. Structure of $\pi_\bullet(bu \wedge bu)$

category: reference

[[!redirects Stable homotopy and generalized homology]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 105311 Revision date: 2016-02-08 05:43:13 Page name: Stable homotopy and generalised homology Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 195.37.209.180

pages/17149.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

This page collects links related to

* [[John Frank Adams]], 

  _Stable homotopy and generalized homology_, 

  Chicago Lectures in mathematics, 1974


on [[stable homotopy theory]] and [[generalised homology]] theory, with emphasis on [[complex cobordism cohomology theory|complex]] [[cobordism theory]], [[complex oriented cohomology theory]], and the [[Adams spectral sequence]]/[[Adams-Novikov spectral sequence]] (today: "[[chromatic homotopy theory]]").

Consists of three lectures, each meant to be readable on their own, and there is overlap in topics. It's part III that begins with an actual introduction to stable homotopy theory, and the so the beginner might prefer to start reading with Part III. Also notice that on p. 87 it says that the material there in part II is to be regarded as superseding part I.

The big story emerging here was later further developed in

* [[Mike Hopkins]], _[[Complex oriented cohomology theories and the language of stacks]]_, 1999

* [[Doug Ravenel]], _[[Complex cobordism and stable homotopy groups of spheres]]_, 1986/2003

* [[Jacob Lurie]], _[[Chromatic Homotopy Theory]]_, 2010

This is about understanding the absolute base space [[Spec(S)]] by [[covering]] it by Spec([[MU]]). See at _[Adams spectral sequences -- As derived descent](Adams%20spectral%20sequence#DefinitionInHigherAlgebra)_.

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Part I

* [[cobordism ring]]

* [[cobordism theory]]

* [[Novikov operations]]

* [[Umkehr map]]

## Part II -- Quillen's work on formal groups and complex cobordism
 {#PartII}

### 0. Introduction

### 1. Formal groups

* [[formal group law]]

### 2. Examples from algebraic topology

* [[complex oriented cohomology theory]]

* generalized [[Chern classes]]

### 3. Reformulation

* [[coalgebra]]

* [[Hopf algebra]]

### 4. Calculations in $E$-homology and cohomology

* [[universal coefficient theorem]]

* [[universal complex orientation on MU]] (Lemma 4.6, example 4.7)

### 5. Lazard's universal ring

* [[Lazard ring]]

### 6. More calculations in $E$-cohomology

* [[Hurewicz homomorphism]]

* [[ordinary homology spectra split]]

* [[homology of MU]]

### 7. The structure of Lazard's universal ring $L$

* [[Lazard's theorem]]

### 8. Quillen's theorem

* [[Quillen's theorem on MU]]


### 9. Corollaries

### 10. Various formulae in $\pi_\bullet(MU)$

### 11. $MU_\bullet(MU)$

* [[Landweber-Novikov theorem]]

### 12. Behaviour of the Bott map

### 13. $K_\bullet(K)$

### 14. The Hattori-Stong theorem

### 15. Quillen's idempotent cohomology operations

### 16. The Brown-Peterson spectrum

* [[BP]]

### 17. $KO_\bullet(KO)$



## Part III
 {#PartIII}

### 1. Introduction

* [[smash product]] (of [[pointed topological spaces]])

### 2. Spectra

* [[spectrum]]

* [[Omega spectrum]]

* [[suspension spectrum]]

* [[Thom spectrum]]

* [[Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]]

* [[topological K-theory]]

* [[suspension spectrum]]

* [[Thom spectrum]]

* [[cylinder spectrum]]

* [[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]]

* [[stable homotopy category]]

* [[cup product]]

* [[CW-spectrum]]


### 3. Elementary properties of the category of CW-spectra

### 4. Smash products

* [[smash product of spectra]]

### 5. Spanier-Whitehead duality

* [[Spanier-Whitehead duality]]

### 6. Homology and cohomology

* [[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]]

* [[Brown's representability theorem]]

* [[stable cohomotopy]]

* [[stable homotopy groups of spheres]]

* [[topological K-theory]]

### 7. The Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence

* [[exact couple]]

* [[spectral sequence]]

* [[Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence]]

### 8. The inverse limit and its derived functors

* [[derived functor]], [[homotopy limit]]

### 9. Products

* [[cup product]]

### 10. Duality in manifolds

* [[ring spectrum]], [[module spectrum]]

### 11. Applications in K-theory

### 12. The Steenrod algebra and its dual

* [[Steenrod algebra]]

### 13. A universal coefficient theorem

* [[universal coefficient theorem]]

### 14. A category of fractions

* [[category of fractions]]

### 15. The Adams spectral sequence

* [[Adams spectral sequence]]

### 16. Applications to $\pi_\bullet(bu \wedge X)$; modules over $K[x,y]$

### 17. Structure of $\pi_\bullet(bu \wedge bu)$

category: reference

[[!redirects Stable homotopy and generalized homology]]
