
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea


A [[model category]] structure for [[excisive functors]] on [[functors]] from ([[finite homotopy type|finite]]) pointed simplicial setrs to pointed simplicial sets ([Lydakis 98, theorem 9.2](#Lydakis98),[Biedermann-Chorny-Röndings 06, section 9](#BiedermannChornyRondings06)), hence (see [here](excisive+%28∞%2C1%29-functor#SpectrumObjects)) a [[model structure for spectra]] ([Lydakis 98, theorem 11.3](#Lydakis98)). 

Special case of a [[model structure for n-excisive functors]].

## Properties

### Model structure for spectra
 {#ModelStructureForSpectra}

The model structure for 1-excisive functors (from pointed finite homotopy types to pointed homotopy types) is [[Quillen equivalence|Quillen equivalent]] to the [[Bousfield-Friedlander model structure]] [[model structure for spectra|for spectra]] ([Lydakis 98, theorem 11.3](#Lydakis98)).

### Symmetric monoidal smash product
 {#SmashProduct}


The [[excisive functors]] naturally carry a [[smash product]] ([Lydakis 98, def. 5.1](#Lydakis98)) making the model structure for 1-excisive functors a [[symmetric monoidal model category]] ([Lydakis 98, section 12](#Lydakis98)), hence a [[symmetric smash product on spectra]]. A  [[monoid]] with respect to this smash product (hence a [[ring spectrum]]) is equivalently a [[functor with smash products]] ("FSP") as earlier considered in ([Bökstedt 86](#Bökstedt86)).

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

The smash product on $[sSet^{\ast/}_{fin}, sSet^{\ast/}]$ of ([Lydakis 98, def. 5.1](#Lydakis98)) is the [[Day convolution product]] with respect to the plain [[smash product]] of [[pointed objects]] $\wedge \colon sSet^{\ast/} \times sSet^{\ast/} \longrightarrow sSet^{\ast/}$ .

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

As in ([MMSS00](Day%20convolution#MMSS00)), the Day convolution product is characterized by making a [[natural isomorphism]] of the form

$$
  [sSet^{\ast/}_{fin}, sSet^{\ast/}](X \wedge Y, Z) \simeq [sSet^{\ast/}_{fin} \times sSet^{\ast/}_{fin}, sSet^{\ast/}](X \overline{\wedge} Y, Z \circ \wedge)
$$

where the _external smash product_ $\overline{\wedge}$ on the right is defined by $X \overline{\wedge} Y  \coloneqq  \wedge \circ (X,Y) $. Now, ([Lydakis 98, def. 5.1](#Lydakis98)) sets 

$$
  X \wedge Y \coloneqq \wedge_\ast (X \overline{\wedge} Y) 
$$

where, by ([Lydakis 98, prop. 3.23](#Lydakis98)),  $\wedge_\ast$ is the [[left adjoint]] to $\wedge^\ast(-) \coloneqq (-)\circ \wedge$. Hence the [[adjunction]] isomorphism gives the above characterization.

=--

## Related concepts

* [[model structure on functors]]

* [[model structure for spectra]]

* [[model structure for n-excisive functors]]

## References

Model structure for [[excisive functors]] on [[simplicial sets]] (hence also a [[model structure for spectra]]) is discussed in:

* {#Lydakis98} Lydakis, _Simplicial functors and stable homotopy theory_ Preprint, available via Hopf archive, 1998 ([pdf](http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/Lydakis/s_functors.pdf))

A similar model structure on functors on topological spaces was given in

* [[William Dwyer]], _Localizations_, In _Axiomatic, enriched and motivic homotopy theory_, volume 131 of NATO Sci. Ser. II Math. Phys. Chem., pages 3–28. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 2004

The [[functors with smash products]] ("FSP"s) appearing in ([Lydakis 98, remark 5.12](#Lydakis98)) had earlier been considered in 

* {#Bökstedt86} [[Marcel Bökstedt]], _Topological Hochschild homology_. Preprint, Bielefeld, 1986

Further generalization of the model structure for excisive functor, in particular to [[enriched functors]] and to a [[model structure for n-excisive functors]] for $n \geq 1$ is discussed in

* {#BiedermannChornyRondings06} [[Georg Biedermann]], [[Boris Chorny]], Oliver Röndigs, _Calculus of functors and model categories_, Advances in Mathematics 214 (2007) 92-115 ([arXiv:math/0601221](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0601221))

* [[Georg Biedermann]], Oliver Röndigs, _Calculus of functors and model categories II_ ([arXiv:1305.2834v2](http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.2834v2))


[[!redirects model structure for excisive functors]]
[[!redirects model structures for excisive functors]]


[[!redirects model structure on excisive functors]]
[[!redirects model structures on excisive functors]]




