pages/17180.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A [[model category]] [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presentation]] for an [[(∞,1)-category]] of [[n-excisive functors]], in particular of [[excisive functors]] (hence a [[model structure for spectra]]).

## Related concepts

* [[model structure on functors]]

* [[model structure for spectra]]

## References

Model structure for [[excisive functors]] (hence also a [[model structure for spectra]]) is discussed in:

* {#Lydakis98} Lydakis, _Simplicial functors and stable homotopy theory_ Preprint, available via Hopf archive, 1998 ([pdf](http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/Lydakis/s_functors.pdf))

Further generalization of this, in particular to [[n-excisive functors]] for $n \geq 1$ is discussed in

* [[William Dwyer]], _Localizations_ In _Axiomatic, enriched and motivic homotopy theory_, volume 131 of NATO Sci. Ser. II Math. Phys. Chem., pages 3–28. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 2004.

* [[Georg Biedermann]], [[Boris Chorny]], Oliver Röndigs, _Calculus of functors and model categories_, Advances in Mathematics 214 (2007) 92-115 ([arXiv:math/0601221](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0601221))

* [[Georg Biedermann]], Oliver Röndigs, _Calculus of functors and model categories II_ ([arXiv:1305.2834v2](http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.2834v2))

[[!redirects model structures for n-excisive functors]]

[[!redirects model structure for excisive functors]]
[[!redirects model structures for excisive functors]]


[[!redirects model structure on excisive functors]]
[[!redirects model structures on excisive functors]]


[[!redirects model structure on n-excisive functors]]
[[!redirects model structures on n-excisive functors]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 105420 Revision date: 2016-02-09 09:03:11 Page name: model structure for excisive functors Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 195.37.209.180

pages/17180.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A [[model category]] [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presentation]] for an [[(∞,1)-category]] of [[n-excisive functors]]. 

For $n = 1$ this is a model structure on [[excisive functors]], hence (for the case of functors from finite pointed homotopy types to pointed homotopy types, see [here](excisive+%28∞%2C1%29-functor#SpectrumObjects)) a [[model structure for spectra]] ([Lydakis 98, theorem 11.3](#Lydakis98)). 

## Examples

### Symmetric monoidal model category for spectra
 {#ModelStructureForSpectra}

The model structure for 1-excisive functors (from pointed finite homotopy types to pointed homotopy types) is [[Quillen equivalence|Quillen equivalent]] to the [[Bousfield-Friedlander model structure]] [[model structure for spectra|for spectra]] ([Lydakis 98, theorem 11.3](#Lydakis98)).

The [[excisive functors]] naturally carry a [[smash product]] ([Lydakis 98, def.5.1](#Lydakis98)) making the model structure for 1-excisive functors a [[symmetric monoidal model category]] ([Lydakis 98, section 12](#Lydakis98)), hence a [[symmetric smash product on spectra]]. This is different in style to that on the "highly structured" cases of [[symmetric spectra]], [[orthogonal spectra]] and [[S-modules]], instead it is the structure that had earlier been introduced as "FSP" ("functors with smash product") in ([Bökstedt 86](#Bökstedt86)).

## Related concepts

* [[model structure on functors]]

* [[model structure for spectra]]

## References

Model structure for [[excisive functors]] (hence also a [[model structure for spectra]]) is discussed in:

* {#Lydakis98} Lydakis, _Simplicial functors and stable homotopy theory_ Preprint, available via Hopf archive, 1998 ([pdf](http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/Lydakis/s_functors.pdf))

The smash product on functors appearing here had earlier been considered under the name "FSP" in 

* {#Bökstedt86} [[Marcel Bökstedt]], _Topological Hochschild homology_. Preprint, Bielefeld, 1986

Further generalization of this, in particular to [[n-excisive functors]] for $n \geq 1$ is discussed in

* [[William Dwyer]], _Localizations_ In _Axiomatic, enriched and motivic homotopy theory_, volume 131 of NATO Sci. Ser. II Math. Phys. Chem., pages 3–28. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 2004.

* [[Georg Biedermann]], [[Boris Chorny]], Oliver Röndigs, _Calculus of functors and model categories_, Advances in Mathematics 214 (2007) 92-115 ([arXiv:math/0601221](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0601221))

* [[Georg Biedermann]], Oliver Röndigs, _Calculus of functors and model categories II_ ([arXiv:1305.2834v2](http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.2834v2))

[[!redirects model structures for n-excisive functors]]

[[!redirects model structure for excisive functors]]
[[!redirects model structures for excisive functors]]


[[!redirects model structure on excisive functors]]
[[!redirects model structures on excisive functors]]


[[!redirects model structure on n-excisive functors]]
[[!redirects model structures on n-excisive functors]]


[[!redirects FSP]]
[[!redirects FSPs]]

[[!redirects functor with smash product]]
[[!redirects functors with smash product]]
[[!redirects functor with smash products]]
[[!redirects functors with smash products]]
