__Quantum linear semigroups__ are [[bialgebra]]s which are deformations of bialgebras of coordinate functions on the groups of $n\times n$-matrices for some $n$. They belong to the class of [[matrix bialgebra]]s. The usual notation for the one-parametric version is $\mathcal{O}(M_q(n))$ or sometimes simply $\mathcal{M}_q(n)$.

Suppose we are given $n\times n$ matrices $P = (p_{ij})$ and 
$Q = (q_{ij})$ with invertible entries in the ground field $F$, 
for which there exist $q$ such that  
$$
  p_{ij} q_{ij} = q^2, q_{ij} = q^{-1}_{ji},\,\,\,\,\,i \lt j,\,\,and \,\,\,\,\,\,
q_{ii} = p_{ii},\,\,\,\,\,\,\, for\,\,\, all\,\,\,\, i.
$$ 

The multiparametric quantized matrix bialgebra (synonym:
multiparametric quantum linear semigroup) $\mathcal{O}(M_{P,Q}(F,n)):= F \langle T^i_j , i,j = 1,\ldots, n\rangle/I$,
where $I$ is the ideal spanned by the relations
\[\array{
T^k_i T^k_j = q_{ij} T^k_j T^k_i, & i \lt j \\
T^k_i T^l_i = p_{kl} T^l_i T^k_i, & k \lt l \\
q_{ij} T^k_j T^l_i = p_{kl} T^l_i  T^k_j, & i\lt j,\,\,\,\,k\lt l \\
T^k_i T^l_j - q_{ij} q^{-1}_{kl} T^l_j T^k_i
= (q_{ij}-p_{ij}^{-1}) T^k_j T^l_i,& i\lt j,\,\,\,\,k\lt l
}\]
$\mathcal{M} = \mathcal{O}(M_{P,Q}(F,n))$ is a bialgebra 
with respect to the "matrix" comultiplication
which is the unique algebra homomorphism $\Delta : \mathcal{M} 
\to\mathcal{M} \otimes\mathcal{M}$
extending the formulas which are written in the matrix form as
$\Delta T^i_j = \sum T^i_k \otimes T^k_j$ with 
counit $\epsilon T^i_j = \delta^i_j$ (Kronecker delta). This means that it is
a matrix bialgebra with basis $\{T^i_j\}_{i,j=1,\ldots,n}$, in fact a free matrix bialgebra over $F$. 

In these conventions, the 1-parametric version $\mathcal{O}(M_q(F))$ is obtained as
a special case when $P = Q$ and
$q_{ij} = q$ for $i \lt j$ and $q_{ij} = q^{-1}$ for $i \gt j$.

__Quantum linear groups__ are Hopf algebras which are quantum deformations of Hopf algebras of coordinate functions on the general linear group or special linear group. There exist one parametric and many parametric versions as well as super analogues. They belong to the class of [[matrix Hopf algebra]]s.

The usual notation for one-parametric versions is $\mathcal{O}(GL_q(n))$, $\mathcal{O}(SL_q(n))$ and variants thereof.


## Bibliography

* related $n$Lab pages: [[quantum group]], [[quantum Gauss decomposition]], [[quantized function algebra]], [[general linear group]]
* Yu. I. Manin, _Quantum groups and non-commutative geometry_, CRM,
Montreal 1988.
* Yu. I. Manin, _Multiparametric quantum deformation of the general
linear supergroup_, Comm. Math. Phys. 123 (1989) 163--175.
* B. Parshall, J.Wang, _Quantum linear groups_, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 89(1991), No. 439, vi+157 pp. 
* E. E. Demidov, _Multiparameter quantum deformations
of the group $GL(n)$_, (Russian) Uspehi Mat. Nauk 46 (1991),
no. 4 (280) 147--148; translation in Russian Math. Surveys
46 (1991) no. 4, 169--171.
* M. Hashimoto, T. Hayashi, _Quantum multilinear algebra_, Tohoku Math. J. 44 (1992) 471-521.
* M. Artin, W. Schelter, J. Tate, _Quantum deformations of $GL_n$_, 
Commun. Pure Appl. Math. XLIV, 879--895 (1991)
* [[Zoran Škoda]], _Localizations for construction of quantum coset spaces_, [math.QA/0301090](http://front.math.ucdavis.edu/math.QA/0301090), in “Noncommutative geometry and Quantum groups”, W.Pusz, P.M. Hajac, eds. Banach Center Publications vol.61, pp. 265–298, Warszawa 2003.
* Z. Škoda, _Every quantum minor generates an Ore set_,
International Math. Res. Notices 2008, rnn063-8; 
[math.QA/0604610](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0604610)
* Siân Fryer, _From restricted permutations to Grassmann necklaces and back again_, [arxiv/1511.06664](http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06664)
