pages/17208.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Complex projective space $\mathbb{C}P^n$ the the [[projective space]] $\mathbb{A}\mathbb{P}^n$ for $\mathbb{A} = \mathbb{C}$ the [[complex numbers]].

## Properties

### Homology and Cohomology 
 {#Cohomology}

The [[ordinary homology]] of $\mathbb{C}P^n$ is

$$
  H_k(\mathbb{C}P^n)\simeq
  \left\{
    \array{
       \mathbb{Z} & for \; k \;even\; and \; k \leq 2n 
       \\
       0 & otherwise
    }
  \right.
  \,.
$$

The [[ordinary cohomology]] of $\mathbb{C}P^n$ is 

$$
  H^k(\mathbb{C}P^n)\simeq
  \left\{
    \array{
       \mathbb{Z} & for \; k \;even\; and \; k \leq 2n 
       \\
       0 & otherwise
    }
  \right.
  \,.
$$

It follows that the analogue remains true for general [[coefficient]] [[groups]] $A$

$$
  H^k(\mathbb{C}P^n,A)
   \simeq
  \left\{
    \array{
       A & for \; k \;even\; and \; k \leq 2n 
       \\
       0 & otherwise
    }
  \right.
  \,.
$$

(Use the [[universal coefficient theorem]] and the fact ([prop.](projective+object#ProjectiveObjectsInAbAreFreeGroups)) that the free group $H_k(\mathbb{C}P^n)$ is projective, so that the $Ext^1$-correction vanishes.)


Under [[cup product]] this forms a [[graded ring]]

$$
  H^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^n) \simeq \mathbb{Z}[t]/(t^{n+1})
  \,,
$$

where $t \in H^2(\mathbb{C}P^n)$ is a generator.

Hence the [[inverse limit]] over $n$ is the [[formal power series]]

$$
  H^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^\infty) \simeq 
  H^\bullet(\underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_n \mathbb{C}P^n)
  \simeq
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n
  H^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^n)
  \simeq
  \mathbb{Z}[ [ t ] ]
  \,.
$$

More generally, for $E$ a [[complex oriented cohomology theory]], then by [this proposition](ordinary+homology+spectra+split#WhenGeneralizedHomologySpectraSplit)
these statements generalize to

$$
  E^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^n) \simeq (\pi_\bullet E)[t]/(t^{n+1})
$$

$$
  E^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^\infty) \simeq (\pi_\bullet E)[ [ t ] ]
  \,,
$$

where now $t \in \tilde E^2(\mathbb{C}P^\infty) \hookrightarrow E^2(\mathbb{C}P^\infty)$ is any [complex orientation](complex+oriented+cohomology+theory#ComplexOrientation) on $E$.

Moreover, the [[infinity-group]]-structure on $\mathbb{C}P^\infty \simeq B U(1)$ induces the structure of a [[formal group law]] on $E^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^\infty) (\pi_\bullet E)[ [ t ] ]$.

## Examples

For $n = 1$: the [[Riemann sphere]].

For $n = \infty$: the [[classifying space]] $B U(1)$, an [[Eilenberg-MacLane space]] $K(\mathbb{Z},2)$.

## References

* Wikipedia, _[Complex projective space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complex_projective_space)_

[[!redirects complex projective spaces]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 108483 Revision date: 2016-05-09 11:38:45 Page name: complex projective space Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 131.220.184.222

pages/17208.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Complex projective space $\mathbb{C}P^n$ the the [[projective space]] $\mathbb{A}\mathbb{P}^n$ for $\mathbb{A} = \mathbb{C}$ the [[complex numbers]].

## Properties

### Cell structure

+-- {: .num_prop #CellComplexStructure}
###### Proposition

There is a [[cell complex]] structure on the $\mathbb{C}P^n$ for $n \in \mathbb{N}$, given by [[induction]], where $\mathbb{C}P^{n+1}$ arises from $\mathbb{C}P^n$ by attaching a single cell of dimension $2n$.

=--

### Homology and Cohomology 
 {#Cohomology}

+-- {: .num_prop #OrdinaryCohomologyOfComplexProjectiveSpace}
###### Proposition

The [[ordinary homology]] of complex projective space $\mathbb{C}P^n$ is

$$
  H_k(\mathbb{C}P^n)\simeq
  \left\{
    \array{
       \mathbb{Z} & for \; k \;even\; and \; k \leq 2n 
       \\
       0 & otherwise
    }
  \right.
  \,.
$$

The [[ordinary cohomology]] of $\mathbb{C}P^n$ is 

$$
  H^k(\mathbb{C}P^n)\simeq
  \left\{
    \array{
       \mathbb{Z} & for \; k \;even\; and \; k \leq 2n 
       \\
       0 & otherwise
    }
  \right.
  \,.
$$
The analogue remains true for general [[coefficient]] [[groups]] $A$

$$
  H^k(\mathbb{C}P^n,A)
   \simeq
  \left\{
    \array{
       A & for \; k \;even\; and \; k \leq 2n 
       \\
       0 & otherwise
    }
  \right.
  \,.
$$

=--

(Use the [[universal coefficient theorem]] and the fact ([prop.](projective+object#ProjectiveObjectsInAbAreFreeGroups)) that the free group $H_k(\mathbb{C}P^n)$ is projective, so that the $Ext^1$-correction vanishes.)


Under [[cup product]] this forms a [[graded ring]]

$$
  H^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^n) \simeq \mathbb{Z}[t]/(t^{n+1})
  \,,
$$

where $t \in H^2(\mathbb{C}P^n)$ is a generator.

Hence the [[inverse limit]] over $n$ is the [[formal power series]]

$$
  H^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^\infty) \simeq 
  H^\bullet(\underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_n \mathbb{C}P^n)
  \simeq
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n
  H^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^n)
  \simeq
  \mathbb{Z}[ [ t ] ]
  \,.
$$

More generally, for $E$ a [[complex oriented cohomology theory]], then by [this proposition](ordinary+homology+spectra+split#WhenGeneralizedHomologySpectraSplit)
these statements generalize to

$$
  E^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^n) \simeq (\pi_\bullet E)[t]/(t^{n+1})
$$

$$
  E^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^\infty) \simeq (\pi_\bullet E)[ [ t ] ]
  \,,
$$

where now $t \in \tilde E^2(\mathbb{C}P^\infty) \hookrightarrow E^2(\mathbb{C}P^\infty)$ is any [complex orientation](complex+oriented+cohomology+theory#ComplexOrientation) on $E$.

Moreover, the [[infinity-group]]-structure on $\mathbb{C}P^\infty \simeq B U(1)$ induces the structure of a [[formal group law]] on $E^\bullet(\mathbb{C}P^\infty) (\pi_\bullet E)[ [ t ] ]$.

## Examples

For $n = 1$: the [[Riemann sphere]].

For $n = \infty$: the [[classifying space]] $B U(1)$, an [[Eilenberg-MacLane space]] $K(\mathbb{Z},2)$.

## References

* Wikipedia, _[Complex projective space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complex_projective_space)_

[[!redirects complex projective spaces]]
