pages/17210.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
#### Limits and colimits
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-limits - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

The notation "$\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1$" is common notation for the first [[derived functor]] $R^1 \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}$ of the [[limit]] functor over a [[sequential diagram]] of [[abelian groups]].

This is often used as the first, and in good cases the only, obstruction to a naive [[limit]] already giving the correct [[homotopy limit]].


## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

Given a tower $A_\bullet$ of [[abelian groups]]

$$
  \cdots \to A_3 \stackrel{f_2}{\to} A_2 \stackrel{f_1}{\to} A_1 \stackrel{f_0}{\to} A_0
$$

then $\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1 A_\bullet$ is defined by the [[long exact sequence]]

$$
  0 \to 
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n A_n
   \stackrel{\prod_k (f_k - f_{k+1})}{\longrightarrow}
  \underset{n}{\prod} A_n
    \longrightarrow
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1_n A_n
  \to 0
  \,.
$$


=--

There is a generalization to groups (not necessarily abelian) (...)


## Properties

### Abstract characterization

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The [[functor]] $\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1 \colon \mathbb{A}^{\mathbb{N}_{\geq}} \longrightarrow Ab$ is the unique functor, up to [[natural isomorphism]], which satisfies

1. for every [[short exact sequence]] $0 \to A_\bullet \to B_\bullet \to C_\bullet \to 0 \;\;\; \in Ab^{(\mathbb{N}, \geq)}$ then the induced sequence

   $$
    0 
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n A_n
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n B_n
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n C_n
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n^1  A_n
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n^1 B_n
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n^1 C_n
    \to 0
   $$

   is a [[long exact sequence]] of abelian groups;

1. if $A_\bullet$ is a tower such that all maps are [[surjections]], then $\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1_n A_n \simeq 0$.

=--

(e.g. [Goerss-Jardine 96, section VII. lemma 6.10](#GoerssJardine96))

### Vanishing of $\lim^1$


+-- {: .num_prop #MittagLefflerCondition}
###### Proposition

A tower $A_\bullet$ of [[abelian groups]]

$$
  \cdots \to A_3 \to A_2 \to A_1 \to A_0
$$

is said to satify the _[[Mittag-Leffler condition]]_ if for all $i \geq k$ there exists $j \geq i \geq k$ such that the [[image]] of the [[homomorphism]] $A_i \to A_k$ equals that of $A_j \to A_K$
 
$$
  im(A_i \to A_k) \simeq im(A_j \to A_k)
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

The Mittag-Leffler condition, def. \ref{MittagLefflerCondition}, is satisfied in particular when all morphisms $A_{i+1}\to A_i$ are [[epimorphisms]] (hence [[surjections]] of the underlying [[sets]]).

=--

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

If a towet $A_\bullet$ satisfies the [[Mittag-Leffler condition]], def. \ref{MittagLefflerCondition}, then its $\underset{\leftarrow}{\lim}^1$ vanishes:

$$
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1 A_\bullet = 0
  \,.
$$

=--

([e.g. Weibel 94, prop. 3.5.7](#Weibel94))


### Milnor exact sequences

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

Let 

$$
  \cdots \to C_3 \to C_2 \to C_1 \to C_0
$$

be a tower of [[chain complexes]] (of [[abelian groups]]) suct that it satisfies degree-wise the [[Mittag-Leffler condition]], def. \ref{MittagLefflerCondition}, and write

$$
  C \coloneqq \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n C_n
$$

for its [[limit]]. Then for each $q \in \mathbb{Z}$ the [[chain homology]] $H_q(-)$ of the limit sits in a [[short exact sequence]] with the ordinary $\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}$ and the $\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1$ of the chain homologies:

$$
  0 \to \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1_i H_{q+1}(C_i)
  \longrightarrow H_q(C)
  \longrightarrow \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i H_q(C_i)
  \to 0
  \,.
$$

=--

(e.g. [Weibel 94, prop. 3.5.8](#Weibel94))


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Let 

$$
  \cdots \to X_3 \to X_2 \to X_1 \to X_0
$$

be a [[tower of fibrations]], for instance a tower of [[simplicial sets]] with each map a [[Kan fibration]]. Then for each $q \in \mathbb{N}$ there is a [[short exact sequence]]

$$
  0 
  \to
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1_i \pi_{q+1}(X_i)
  \longrightarrow
  \pi_q(\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i X_i)
  \longrightarrow
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i \pi_q(X_i)
  \to 
  0
  \,,
$$

for $\pi_\bullet$ the [[homotopy group]]-functor.

=--

e.g. ([Goerss-Jardine 96, section VII. prop. 6.14](#GoerssJardine96))


## References

* {#Milnor62} [[John Milnor]], _On axiomatic homology theory_, Pacific J. Math.
Volume 12, Number 1 (1962), 337-341 ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.pjm/1103036730))

* {#Weibel94} [[Charles Weibel]], section 3.5 of _[[An Introduction to Homological Algebra]]_, Cambridge University Press (1994)

* {#GoerssJardine99} [[Paul Goerss]], [[Rick Jardine]], section VII.6 of _[[Simplicial homotopy theory]]_, Birkhäuser (1996)

[[!redirects lim1]]

[[!redirects lim^1]]


[[!redirects Milnor sequence]]
[[!redirects Milnor sequences]]
[[!redirects Milnor exact sequence]]
[[!redirects Milnor exact sequences]]
[[!redirects Milnor short exact sequence]]
[[!redirects Milnor short exact sequences]]
[[!redirects Milnor long exact sequence]]
[[!redirects Milnor long exact sequences]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 105666 Revision date: 2016-02-16 01:59:56 Page name: lim^1 and Milnor sequences Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 195.37.209.180

pages/17210.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
#### Limits and colimits
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-limits - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

The notation "$\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1$" is common notation for the first [[derived functor]] $R^1 \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}$ of the [[limit]] functor over a [[sequential diagram]] of [[abelian groups]].

This is often used as the first, and in good cases the only, obstruction to a naive [[limit]] already giving the correct [[homotopy limit]].


## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

Given a tower $A_\bullet$ of [[abelian groups]]

$$
  \cdots \to A_3 \stackrel{f_2}{\to} A_2 \stackrel{f_1}{\to} A_1 \stackrel{f_0}{\to} A_0
$$

then $\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1 A_\bullet$ is defined by the [[long exact sequence]]

$$
  0 \to 
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n A_n
   \stackrel{\prod_k (f_k - f_{k+1})}{\longrightarrow}
  \underset{n}{\prod} A_n
    \longrightarrow
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1_n A_n
  \to 0
  \,.
$$


=--

There is a generalization to groups (not necessarily abelian) (...)


## Properties

### Abstract characterization

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The [[functor]] $\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1 \colon \mathbb{A}^{\mathbb{N}_{\geq}} \longrightarrow Ab$ is the unique functor, up to [[natural isomorphism]], which satisfies

1. for every [[short exact sequence]] $0 \to A_\bullet \to B_\bullet \to C_\bullet \to 0 \;\;\; \in Ab^{(\mathbb{N}, \geq)}$ then the induced sequence

   $$
    0 
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n A_n
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n B_n
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n C_n
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n^1  A_n
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n^1 B_n
    \to
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n^1 C_n
    \to 0
   $$

   is a [[long exact sequence]] of abelian groups;

1. if $A_\bullet$ is a tower such that all maps are [[surjections]], then $\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1_n A_n \simeq 0$.

=--

(e.g. [Goerss-Jardine 96, section VI. lemma 2.11](#GoerssJardine96))

### Vanishing of $\lim^1$


+-- {: .num_prop #MittagLefflerCondition}
###### Proposition

A tower $A_\bullet$ of [[abelian groups]]

$$
  \cdots \to A_3 \to A_2 \to A_1 \to A_0
$$

is said to satify the _[[Mittag-Leffler condition]]_ if for all $i \geq k$ there exists $j \geq i \geq k$ such that the [[image]] of the [[homomorphism]] $A_i \to A_k$ equals that of $A_j \to A_K$
 
$$
  im(A_i \to A_k) \simeq im(A_j \to A_k)
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

The Mittag-Leffler condition, def. \ref{MittagLefflerCondition}, is satisfied in particular when all morphisms $A_{i+1}\to A_i$ are [[epimorphisms]] (hence [[surjections]] of the underlying [[sets]]).

=--

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

If a tower $A_\bullet$ satisfies the [[Mittag-Leffler condition]], def. \ref{MittagLefflerCondition}, then its $\underset{\leftarrow}{\lim}^1$ vanishes:

$$
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1 A_\bullet = 0
  \,.
$$

=--

([e.g. Weibel 94, prop. 3.5.7](#Weibel94))


### Milnor exact sequences

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

Let 

$$
  \cdots \to C_3 \to C_2 \to C_1 \to C_0
$$

be a tower of [[chain complexes]] (of [[abelian groups]]) suct that it satisfies degree-wise the [[Mittag-Leffler condition]], def. \ref{MittagLefflerCondition}, and write

$$
  C \coloneqq \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_n C_n
$$

for its [[limit]]. Then for each $q \in \mathbb{Z}$ the [[chain homology]] $H_q(-)$ of the limit sits in a [[short exact sequence]] with the ordinary $\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}$ and the $\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1$ of the chain homologies:

$$
  0 \to \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1_i H_{q+1}(C_i)
  \longrightarrow H_q(C)
  \longrightarrow \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i H_q(C_i)
  \to 0
  \,.
$$

=--

(e.g. [Weibel 94, prop. 3.5.8](#Weibel94))


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition
**(Milnor exact sequence)**

Let 

$$
  \cdots \to X_3 \to X_2 \to X_1 \to X_0
$$

be a [[tower of fibrations]], for instance a tower of [[simplicial sets]] with each map a [[Kan fibration]]. Then for each $q \in \mathbb{N}$ there is a [[short exact sequence]]

$$
  0 
  \to
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}^1_i \pi_{q+1}(X_i)
  \longrightarrow
  \pi_q(\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i X_i)
  \longrightarrow
  \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i \pi_q(X_i)
  \to 
  0
  \,,
$$

for $\pi_\bullet$ the [[homotopy group]]-functor. (Exact as pointed sets for $i = 0$, as groups for $i \geq 1$.)

=--

e.g. ([Goerss-Jardine 96, section VI. prop. 2.15](#GoerssJardine96))


## References

* {#Milnor62} [[John Milnor]], _On axiomatic homology theory_, Pacific J. Math.
Volume 12, Number 1 (1962), 337-341 ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.pjm/1103036730))

* {#Weibel94} [[Charles Weibel]], section 3.5 of _[[An Introduction to Homological Algebra]]_, Cambridge University Press (1994)

* {#GoerssJardine99} [[Paul Goerss]], [[Rick Jardine]], section VI.2 of _[[Simplicial homotopy theory]]_, Modern Birkhäuser Classics (1999)

  (that's section VII.6 of the edition in "Progress of Mathematics" )

[[!redirects lim1]]

[[!redirects lim^1]]


[[!redirects Milnor sequence]]
[[!redirects Milnor sequences]]
[[!redirects Milnor exact sequence]]
[[!redirects Milnor exact sequences]]
[[!redirects Milnor short exact sequence]]
[[!redirects Milnor short exact sequences]]
[[!redirects Milnor long exact sequence]]
[[!redirects Milnor long exact sequences]]
