pages/17295.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Factorization systems
+--{: .hide}
[[!include factorization systems - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

### Injective and projective

Given a [[category]] $\mathcal{C}$ and a [[class]] $J \subset Mor(\mathcal{C})$ of its [[morphisms]], then any morphism $f \in Mor(\mathcal{C})$ is called

* a **$J$-injective morphism** if it has the [[right lifting property]] against elements in $S$;

* a **$J$-projective morphism** if it has the [[left lifting property]] against elements in $S$.

If $\mathcal{C}$ has a [[terminal object]] $\ast$, then an object $X$ for which $X \stackrel{\exists!}{\to} \ast$ is a $J$-injective morphism is called a $J$-[[injective object]].

If $\mathcal{C}$ has an [[initial object]] $\emptyset$, then an object $X$ for which $\emptyset \stackrel{\exists!}{\to} X$ is a $J$-projective morphism is called a $J$-[[projective object]].

### Fibration and cofibration

Frequently one furthermore says:

* a **$J$-[[cofibration]]** is a morphism that has the [[left lifting property]] against all $J$-injective morphisms;

* a **$J$-[[fibration]]** is a morphism that has the [[right lifting property]] against all $J$-projective morphisms.

## Related concepts

* the [[small object argument]] is about factoring morphisms into $J$-cofibrations followed by $J$-injective morphisms.

[[!redirects injective morphism]]
[[!redirects injective morphisms]]

[[!redirects projective morphism]]
[[!redirects projextive morphisms]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 107040 Revision date: 2016-03-31 05:18:41 Page name: injective or projective morphism Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 86.187.127.228

pages/17295.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Factorization systems
+--{: .hide}
[[!include factorization systems - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Injective and projective morphisms are [[morphisms]] in a [[category]] satisfying some [[lifting property]]. Often they appear jointly to form [[weak factorization systems]].

## Definition

### Injective and projective

Given a [[category]] $\mathcal{C}$ and a [[class]] $J \subset Mor(\mathcal{C})$ of its [[morphisms]], then any morphism $f \in Mor(\mathcal{C})$ is called

* a **$J$-injective morphism** if it has the [[right lifting property]] against elements in $S$;

* a **$J$-projective morphism** if it has the [[left lifting property]] against elements in $S$.

If $\mathcal{C}$ has a [[terminal object]] $\ast$, then an object $X$ for which $X \stackrel{\exists!}{\to} \ast$ is a $J$-injective morphism is called a $J$-[[injective object]].

If $\mathcal{C}$ has an [[initial object]] $\emptyset$, then an object $X$ for which $\emptyset \stackrel{\exists!}{\to} X$ is a $J$-projective morphism is called a $J$-[[projective object]].

### Fibration and cofibration

Frequently one furthermore says:

* a **$J$-[[cofibration]]** is a morphism that has the [[left lifting property]] against all $J$-injective morphisms;

* a **$J$-[[fibration]]** is a morphism that has the [[right lifting property]] against all $J$-projective morphisms.

## Related concepts

* the [[small object argument]] is about factoring morphisms into $J$-cofibrations followed by $J$-injective morphisms.

[[!redirects injective morphism]]
[[!redirects injective morphisms]]

[[!redirects projective morphism]]
[[!redirects projective morphisms]]
