

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The standard [[model category]] structure on the [[category]] of [[sequential spectra]] in ([[pointed topological space|pointed]]) [[topological spaces]] is a standard [[model structure on sequential spectra]]. An immediate variant works for [[sequential spectra]] in [[simplicial set]], see at _[[Bousfield-Friedlander model structure]]_.

As such, the model structure on topological sequential spectra [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presents]] the [[stable (infinity,1)-category of spectra]] of [[stable homotopy theory]], hence, in particular, its [[homotopy category]] is the classical [[stable homotopy category]].

## Sequential spectra

For ease of reference, we collect some basic definitions from _[[sequential spectra]]_.

The following def. \ref{SequentialSpectra} is the traditional component-wise definition of [[sequential spectra]], was first stated in ([Lima 58](spectrum#Lima58)) and became widely appreciated with ([Boardman 65](spectrum#Boardman65)).  

> It is generally supposed that [[George Whitehead|G. W. Whitehead]] also had something to do with it, but the latter takes a modest attitude about that. ([Adams 74, p. 131](#Adams74))

Below in prop. \ref{SequentialSpectraAsDiagramSpectra} we discuss an equivalent definition of sequrntial spectra as "topological diagram spectra" ([Mandell-May-Schwede-Shipley 00](#MMSS00)), namely as [[topologically enriched functors]] ([defn.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor)) on [[n-spheres]], which is useful for establishing the [[stable model category]] structure ([below](#StableModelStructureOnSequentialSpectra)) and for establishing the [[symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]] (in [1.2](#DiagramSpectra)).

Throughout we say "[[topological space]]" for [[compactly generated topological space]] ([defn.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#kTop))

+-- {: .num_defn #SequentialSpectra}
###### Definition

A **[[sequential spectrum|sequential]] [[prespectrum]] in [[topological spaces]]**, or just **[[sequential spectrum]]** for short (or even just **[[spectrum]]), is

1. an $\mathbb{N}$-[[graded object|graded]] [[pointed topological space|pointed]] [[compactly generated topological space]]  $X_\bullet = (X_n \in Top_{cg}^{\ast/})_{n \in \mathbb{N}}$ (the **component spaces**); 

1. pointed [[continuous functions]] $\sigma_n \colon S^1 \wedge X_n \to X_{n+1}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$ (the **structure maps**) from the [[smash product]] ([defn.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#SmashProductOfPointedObjects))  of one component space with the standard [[1-sphere]] to the next component space.

 A [[homomorphism]] $f \colon X \to Y$ of sequential spectra is a sequence $f_\bullet \colon X_\bullet \to Y_\bullet$ of base point-preserving continuous function, such that all [[diagrams]] of the form

$$
  \array{
    S^1 \wedge X_n &\stackrel{S^1 \wedge f_n}{\longrightarrow}& S^1 \wedge Y_n
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma_n^X}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma_n^Y}}
    \\
    X_{n+1} &\stackrel{f_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow}& Y_{n+1}
  }
$$

[[commuting diagram|commute]].

Write $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ for this [[category]] of topological sequential spectra.

=--

Due to the classical [[adjunction]]

$$
  Top_{cg}^{\ast/}
    \underoverset
     {\underset{Maps(S^1,-)_\ast}{\longrightarrow}}
     {\overset{S^1 \wedge (-)}{\longleftarrow}}
     {\bot}
  Top_{cg}^{\ast/}
$$

from [[Introduction to Stable homotopy theory -- P|classical homotopy theory]] ([this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#PointedCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpacesIsSymmetricMonoidalClosed)), the definition of sequential spectra in def. \ref{SequentialSpectra} is equivalent to the following definition

+-- {: .num_defn #SequentialSpectrumViaAdjunctStructureMaps}
###### Definition

A **[[sequential spectrum|sequential]] [[prespectrum]] in [[topological spaces]]**, or just **[[sequential spectrum]]** for short (or even just **[[spectrum]]), is

1. an $\mathbb{N}$-[[graded object|graded]] [[pointed topological space|pointed]] [[compactly generated topological space]]  
  
   $$
     X_\bullet = (X_n \in Top_{cg}^{\ast/})_{n \in \mathbb{N}}
   $$ 

   (the **component spaces**); 

1. pointed [[continuous functions]] 

   $$
     \tilde \sigma_n \colon X_n \to Maps(S^1,X_{n+1})_\ast
   $$ 

   for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$ (the **adjunct structure maps**) from one component space to the pointed [[mapping space]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#CompactlyGeneratedMappingSpaces), [exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#PointedMappingSpace)) out of $S^1$ into the next component space.

 A [[homomorphism]] $f \colon X \to Y$ of sequential spectra is a sequence $\widetilde{f_\bullet} \colon X_\bullet \to Y_\bullet$ of base point-preserving continuous function, such that all [[diagrams]] of the form

$$
  \array{
    X_n &\overset{f_n}{\longrightarrow}& Y_n
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\tilde \sigma^X_n}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\tilde \sigma^Y_n}}
    \\
    Maps(S^1, X_{n+1})_\ast
      &\underset{Maps(S^1,f_{n+1})_\ast}{\longrightarrow}&
    Maps(S^1, Y_{n+1})_\ast
  }
$$

[[commuting diagram|commute]].

=--




+-- {: .num_example #SuspensionSpectrum}
###### Example

For $X\in Top^{\ast/_{cg}}$ a [[pointed topological space]], its **[[suspension spectrum]]** $\Sigma^\infty X$ is the [[sequential spectrum]] , def. \ref{SequentialSpectra} with

* $(\Sigma^\infty X)_n \coloneqq S^n \wedge X$;

* $\sigma_n \colon S^1 \wedge S^n \wedge X \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} S^{n+1}X$ the canonical [[homeomorphism]].

This construction extends to a [[functor]]

$$
  \Sigma^\infty
    \;\colon\;
  Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
    \longrightarrow
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
  \,.
$$


=--

+-- {: .num_example #SuspensionSpectrum}
###### Example

The [[suspension spectrum]] (example \ref{SuspensionSpectrum}) of the point is the **standard sequential [[sphere spectrum]]** 

$$
  \mathbb{S}_{seq} \coloneqq \Sigma^\infty \ast
  \,.
$$

Its $n$th component space is the standard [[n-sphere]]
 
$$ 
  (\mathbb{S}_{seq})_n = S^n
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #TensoringAndPoweringOfSequentialSpectra}
###### Definition

Let $X\in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ be a [[sequential spectrum]] (def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}) and $K \in Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ a [[pointed topological space|pointed]] [[compactly generated topological space]]. Then

1. $X \wedge K$ (the **[[smash product|smash]] [[tensoring]]** of $X$ with $K$) is the sequential spectrum with 

   * $(X \wedge K)_n \coloneqq X_n \wedge K$ ([[smash product]] on component spaces ([defn.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#SmashProductOfPointedObjects)))

   * $\sigma_n^{X \wedge K} \coloneqq \sigma_n^{X} \wedge id_{K}$.

1. $Maps(K,X)_\ast$ (the **[[powering]]** of $K$ into $X$) is the sequential spectrum with

   * $(Maps(K,X)_\ast)_n \coloneqq Maps(K,X_n)_\ast$ (compactly generated [[pointed mapping space]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#CompactlyGeneratedMappingSpaces), [def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#PointedMappingSpace)))

   * $\sigma_n^{Maps(K,X)_\ast} \colon S^1 \wedge Maps(K,X_n) \to Maps(K,S^1 \wedge X_n)_\ast \overset{Maps(K,\sigma_n)_\ast}{\longrightarrow} Maps(K,X_{n+1})_\ast$.

These operations canonically extend to [[functors]]

$$
  (-)\wedge (-)
    \;\colon\;
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg}) \times Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
    \longrightarrow
  SeqSpec(Top^{\ast}_{cg})
$$

and

$$
  Maps(-,-)_\ast
    \;\colon\;
  (Top^{\ast/}_{cg})^{op}
  \times
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
    \longrightarrow
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
  \,.
$$

=--


+-- {: .num_prop #AdjunctionBetweenSmashTensoringAndPowering}
###### Proposition

For any $K \in Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ the functors of smash tensoring and powering with $K$, from def. \ref{TensoringAndPoweringOfSequentialSpectra}, constitute a pair of [[adjoint functors]]

$$
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
    \underoverset
    {
      \underset{Maps(K,-)_\ast}{\longrightarrow}
    }
    {
      \overset{(-) \wedge K}{\longleftarrow}
    }
    {\bot}
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

For $X, Y\in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ and $K \in Top_{cg}^{\ast/}$, let

$$
  X \wedge K \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} Y
$$

be a morphism, with component maps fitting into commuting squares of the form

$$
  \array{
    S^1 \wedge X_n \wedge K 
      &\overset{S^1 \wedge f_n}{\longrightarrow}&
    S^1 \wedge Y_n
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\sigma^X_n \wedge K}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\sigma^Y_n}
    \\
    X_{n+1} \wedge K
     &\overset{f_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow}&
   Y_{n+1}
  }
  \,.
$$

The adjunction

$$
  Top_{cg}^{\ast/}
    \underoverset
     {\underset{Maps(K,-)_\ast}{\longrightarrow}}
     {\overset{(-) \wedge K}{\longleftarrow}}
     {\bot}
  Top_{cg}^{\ast/}
$$

(from [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#PointedCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpacesIsSymmetricMonoidalClosed)) gives that these squares are in natural bijection with squares of the form

$$
  \array{
    S^1 \wedge X_n
      &\overset{\widetilde{S^1 \wedge f_n}}{\longrightarrow}&
    Maps(K,S^1 \wedge Y_n)_\ast
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\sigma_n^X}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{Maps(K,\sigma_n^Y)_\ast}}
    \\
    X_{n+1} 
      &\overset{\tilde f_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow}&
    Maps(K, Y_{n+1})_\ast
  }
  \,.
$$

But since the map $S^1 \wedge f_n$ is the smash product of two maps, only one of which involves the smash factor of $K$, one sees that here the top map factors through the inclusion of the space of those functions $K \to S^1 \wedge Y^n$ whose first component is constant on the basepoint, hence through 

$$
  S^1 \wedge Maps(K,Y_n)_\ast 
    \longrightarrow 
  Maps(K, S^1 \wedge Y_n)_\ast
$$

$$
  [s,\phi] \mapsto [const_s,\phi]
  \,.
$$

Hence the commuting square above factors as

$$
  \array{
    S^1 \wedge X_n
      &\overset{S^1 \wedge \tilde f_n}{\longrightarrow}&
    S^1 \wedge Maps(K, Y_n)_\ast
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\sigma_n^X}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma_n^{Maps(K,Y)_\ast}}}
    \\
    X_{n+1}
      &\overset{\tilde f_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow}&
    Maps(K, Y_{n+1})_\ast
  }
  \,.
$$

This gives the structure maps for a homomorphism

$$
  \tilde f 
    \;\colon\;
  X \longrightarrow Maps(K,Y)_\ast
  \,.
$$

Running this argument backwards shows that the map $f \mapsto \tilde f$ given thereby is a bijection.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

For the [[adjunction]] of prop. \ref{AdjunctionBetweenSmashTensoringAndPowering} it is crucial that the smash tensoring in def. \ref{TensoringAndPoweringOfSequentialSpectra} is from the _right_, at least as long as the structure maps in def. \ref{SequentialSpectra} are defined as they are, with the circle smash factor on the left. We could change both at once: take the structure maps to be from smash products with the circle on the right, and take smash tensoring to be from the left. But having both on the right or both on the left does not work.

=--


+-- {: .num_example #StandardCylinderSpectrumSequential}
###### Example

For $X \in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ a [[sequential spectrum]], def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}, its **standard [[cylinder spectrum]]** is its [[smash product|smash]] [[tensoring]] $X \wedge (I_+)$, def. \ref{TensoringAndPoweringOfSequentialSpectra}, with the standard interval ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicalInterval)) with a basepoint freely adjoined ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#BasePointAdjoined)). The component spaces of the [[cylinder spectrum]] are the standard [[reduced cylinders]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#StandardReducedCyclinderInTop)) of the component spaces of $X$:

$$
  (X \wedge (I_+))_n
  =
  X_n \wedge I_+
  \,.
$$

By the functoriality of the [[smash product|smash]] [[tensoring]], the factoring 

$$
  \nabla_{S^0} \;\colon\; S^0 \vee S^0 \longrightarrow I_+ \longrightarrow S^0
$$

of the [[codiagonal]] on the [[0-sphere]] through the standard interval with a base point adjoined, gives a factoring of the [[codiagonal]] of $X$ through its standard [[cylinder spectrum]]

$$
  \nabla_X
  \;\colon\;
  X \vee X 
    \longrightarrow
  X \wedge (I_+)
   \longrightarrow
  X
$$

(where we are using that [[wedge sum]] is the [[coproduct]] in [[pointed topological spaces]] ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#WedgeSumAsCoproduct)).)

=--

+-- {: .num_example #StandardPathSpaceSpectrumSequential}
###### Example

For $X \in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ a [[sequential spectrum]], def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}, its **standard path space spectrum** is its [[powering]] $Maps(I_+,X)$, def. \ref{TensoringAndPoweringOfSequentialSpectra}, with the standard interval ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicalInterval)) with a basepoint freely adjoined ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#BasePointAdjoined)). The component spaces of the path space spectrum are the standard path space objects of the component spaces of $X$:

$$
  (Maps(I_+, X)_\ast)_n
  =
  Maps(I_+, X)_\ast
  \,.
$$

By the functoriality of the [[powering]], the factoring 

$$
  \nabla_{S^0} \;\colon\; S^0 \vee S^0 \longrightarrow I_+ \longrightarrow S^0
$$

of the [[codiagonal]] on the [[0-sphere]] through the standard interval with a base point adjoined, gives a factoring of the [[diagonal]] of $X$ through its standard path space spectrum

$$
  \Delta_X
    \;\colon\;
  X
   \overset{Maps(I_+ \to S^0, X)_\ast, }{\longrightarrow}
  Maps(I_+,X)_\ast
   \overset{Maps(S^0 \vee S^0 \to I_+, X)_\ast}{\longrightarrow}
  X \times X
$$

(where we are using that [[wedge sum]] is the [[coproduct]] in [[pointed topological spaces]] ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#WedgeSumAsCoproduct))).

=--



+-- {: .num_prop #SigmaInfinityOmegaInfinity}
###### Proposition

The functor $\Sigma^\infty$ that forms [[suspension spectra]] (def. \ref{SuspensionSpectrum}) has a [[right adjoint]] functor $\Omega^\infty$

$$
  (\Sigma^\infty \dashv \Omega^\infty)
  \;\colon\;
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
    \underoverset
      {\underset{\Omega^{\infty}}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\overset{\Sigma^\infty}{\longleftarrow}}
      {\bot}
  Top_{cg}^{\ast/}
  \,,
$$

given by picking the 0-comonent space:

$$
  \Omega^\infty(X) = X_0
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By def. \ref{SequentialSpectra} the components $f_n$ of a homomorphism of [[sequential spectra]] of the form 

$$
  \Sigma^\infty X \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} Y
$$ 

have to make these diagrams commute

$$
  \array{
    S^1 \wedge S^n X &\overset{S^1 \wedge f_n}{\longrightarrow}& S^1 \wedge Y_{n}
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\simeq}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma^Y_n}}
    \\
    S^{n+1} \wedge X
    &\overset{f_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow}& Y_{n+1}
  }
$$

for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$. Since here the left vertical map is an isomorphism by def. \ref{SuspensionSpectrum}, this uniquely fixes $f_{n+1}$ in terms of $f_n$. Hence the only freedom in specifying $f$ is in the choice of the component $f_0 \colon X \longrightarrow Y_0$, which is equivalently a morphism

$$
  X \overset{\tilde f}{\longrightarrow} \Omega^\infty Y
  \,.
$$


=--

##### Suspension and looping

We discuss models for the operation of [[reduced suspension]] and forming [[loop space objects]] of sequential spectra.

+-- {: .num_defn #SequentialSpectrumRealSuspension}
###### Definition

For $X$ a sequential spectrum, then

1. the **standard suspension** of $X$ is $X \wedge S^1$ according to def. \ref{TensoringAndPoweringOfSequentialSpectra};

1. the **standard looping** of $X$ is $Maps(S^1,X)_\ast$ according to def. \ref{TensoringAndPoweringOfSequentialSpectra}.

The standard suspension is equivalently the [[cofiber]] of the canonical inclusion of boundaries into the standard [[cylinder spectrum]]  $X \wedge (I_+)$ of example \ref{StandardCylinderSpectrumSequential}:

$$
  X \wedge S^1 
    \simeq
  cofib\left(
    X \vee X \to X \wedge (I_+)
  \right)
  \,.
$$

The standard looping is equivalently the [[fiber]] of the canonical projection from the standard path space spectrum $Maps(I_+,X)_\ast$ (exmple \ref{StandardPathSpaceSpectrumSequential}):

$$
  Maps(S^1,X)_\ast 
   \simeq
  fib\left(
    Maps(I_+,X)_\ast \to X \times X
  \right)
  \,.
$$


=--

There are two other models for suspension and looping of spectra, which will turn out to be isomorphic in the [[stable homotopy category]]:

+-- {: .num_defn #ShiftedSpectrum}
###### Definition

For $X$ a [[sequential spectrum]] (def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}) and $k \in \mathbb{Z}$, the $k$-fold **shifted spectrum** of $X$ is the sequential spectrum denoted $X[k]$ given by

* $(X[k])_n \coloneqq \left\{ \array{X_{n+k} & for \; n+k \geq 0 \\ \ast & otherwise } \right. $;

* $\sigma_n^{X[k]} \coloneqq \left\{ \array{ \sigma^X_{n+k} & for \; n+k \geq 0 \\ 0 & otherwise} \right. $.

=--


+-- {: .num_defn #SequentialSpectrumFakeSuspension}
###### Definition

For $X$ a [[sequential spectrum]], def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}, then

1. the **alternative suspension** of $X$ is the sequential spectrum $\Sigma X$ with

   1. $(\Sigma X)_n \coloneqq S^1 \wedge X_n$

   1. $\sigma_n^{\Sigma X} \coloneqq S^1 \wedge (\sigma^X_n)$.

1. the **alternative looping** of $X$ is the sequential spectrum $\Omega X$ with

   1. $(\Omega X)_n \coloneqq Maps(S^1,X_n)_\ast$;

   1. $\tilde \sigma_n^{\Omega X} \coloneqq Maps(S^1,\tilde \sigma^X_n)_\ast$.  

Here $\tilde \sigma_n$ denotes the [[adjunct]] of $\sigma_n$.

=--

In some references this "alternative suspension" is called the "fake suspension" e.g. ([Jardine 15, section 10.4](sequential+spectrum#Jardine15)).

+-- {: .num_remark #StandardAndAlternativeSuspensionAreNotDirectlyComparable}
###### Remark

There is no direct comparison morphism between the standard suspension (def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumRealSuspension}) and the alternative suspension (def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumFakeSuspension}). This is due to the non-trivial graded commutativity of smash products of spheres (prop. \ref{GradedCommutativityOfSmashOfSpheres}): 

namely a comparison morphism $\Sigma X \longrightarrow X \wedge S^1$ (or alternatively the other way round) would have to make the following diagrams commute:

$$
  \array{
     S^1 \wedge S^1 \wedge X_n &\longrightarrow& S^1 \wedge X_n \wedge S^1
     \\
     {}^{\mathllap{S^1 \wedge \sigma_n}}\downarrow 
       &(nc)& 
     \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma_n \wedge S^1}}
     \\
     S^1 \wedge X_{n-1} &\longrightarrow& X_{n-1} \wedge S^1
  }
$$

Clearly the only way to go about achieving this is to have the horizontal morphisms be the [[braiding]] homomorphisms of the [[smash product]]. To see this more clearly, consider labeling the two copies of the circle appearing here as $S^1_a$ and $S^1_b$. Then the diagram we are dealing with looks like this:

$$
  \array{
     S_a^1 \wedge S_b^1 \wedge X_n 
       &\longrightarrow& 
     S_a^1 \wedge X_n \wedge S_b^1
     \\
     {}^{\mathllap{S^1_a \wedge \sigma_n}}\downarrow 
       &(nc)& 
     \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma_n \wedge S^1_b}}
     \\
     S_a^1 \wedge X_{n+1} &\longrightarrow& X_{n+1} \wedge S_b^1
  }
$$

If we had $S^1_a \wedge \sigma_n$ on the left and $\sigma_n \wedge S^1_a$ on the right, then the [[natural transformation|naturality]] of the [[braiding]] would give a commuting diagram. But since this is not the case, the only way to achieve this would be by exchanging in the top left

$$
  S^1_a \wedge S^1_b \longrightarrow S^1_b \wedge S^1_a
  \,.
$$

However, this map is non-trivial. It represents $-1$ in $[S^2, S^2]_\ast = \pi_2(S^2) = \mathbb{Z}$. Hence inserting this map in the top of the previous diagram still does not make it commute.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #ShiftingCommutesWithLoopingAndSuspensionOfSequentialSpectra}
###### Remark

The looping and suspension operations in def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumRealSuspension} and def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumFakeSuspension} commute with shifting, def. \ref{ShiftedSpectrum}. Therefore in expressions like $\Sigma (X[1])$ etc. we may omit the parenthesis.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #AdjunctionsBetweenLoopingAndDeloopingForSeqSpec}
###### Proposition

The constructions from def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumRealSuspension}, def. \ref{ShiftedSpectrum} and def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumFakeSuspension} form pairs of [[adjoint functors]] $SeqSpec \to SeqSpec$ like so:

1. $(-)[-1] \dashv (-)[1]$;

1. $(-)\wedge S^1 \dashv Maps(S^1,-)_\ast$;

1. $\Sigma \dashv \Omega$.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Regarding the first statement: 

A morphism of the form 
$f \;\colon\; X[-1] \longrightarrow Y$ has components of the form

$$
  \array{
    \vdots && \vdots
    \\
    X_2 &\overset{f_2}{\longrightarrow}& Y_3  
    \\
    X_1 &\overset{f_2}{\longrightarrow}& Y_2
    \\
    X_0 &\overset{f_1}{\longrightarrow}& Y_1
    \\
    \ast &\overset{f_0 = 0}{\longrightarrow}& Y_0
  }
$$

and the compatibility condition with the structure maps in lowest degree is automatically satisfied

$$
  \array{
    \ast &\overset{(S^1 \wedge f_0) = 0}{\longrightarrow}& S^1 \wedge Y_0
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\sigma^{X[-1]}_0 = 0}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma^Y_0}}
    \\
    X_0 &\overset{f_1}{\longrightarrow}& Y_1
  }
  \,.
$$

Therefore this is equivalent to components

$$
  \array{
    \vdots && \vdots
    \\
    X_2 &\overset{f_2}{\longrightarrow}& Y_3  
    \\
    X_1 &\overset{f_2}{\longrightarrow}& Y_2
    \\
    X_0 &\overset{f_1}{\longrightarrow}& Y_1
  }
$$

hence to a morphism $X \longrightarrow Y[1]$.




The second statement is a special case of prop. \ref{AdjunctionBetweenSmashTensoringAndPowering}.

Regarding the third statement:

This follows by applying the ([[smash product]]$\dashv$[[pointed mapping space]])-adjunction isomorphism twice, like so:

Morphisms $f\colon \Sigma X \to Y$ in the sense of def. \ref{SequentialSpectra} are in components given by commuting diagrams of this form:

$$
  \array{  
    S^1 \wedge S^1 \wedge X_{n} 
      &\overset{S^1 \wedge f_{n}}{\longrightarrow}&
    S^1 \wedge Y_{n}
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{S^1 \wedge \sigma_n^X}}\downarrow 
     && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma^Y_n}}
    \\
    S^1 \wedge X_{n+1} &\underset{f_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow}& Y_{n+1}
  }
  \,.
$$

Applying the adjunction isomorphism diagonally   gives a natural bijection to diagrams of this form:

$$
  \array{
   S^1 \wedge X_n &\overset{f_n}{\longrightarrow}& Y_n
   \\
   {}^{\mathllap{\sigma^X_n}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\tilde \sigma^Y_n}}
   \\
   X_{n+1} &\underset{\widetilde {f_{n+1}}}{\longrightarrow}& Maps(S^1,Y_{n+1})_\ast
  }
  \,.
$$

(To see this in full detail, for instance for the [[adjunct]] of the left and bottom morphism: chase the identity $id_{S^1 \wedge X_{n+1}}$ in both ways 

$$
  \array{
    Hom(S^1 \wedge X_{n+1}, S^1 \wedge X_{n+1})
      &\overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}&
    Hom(X_{n+1}, Maps(S^1, S^1 \wedge X_{n+1})_\ast)
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{Hom(S^1 \wedge \sigma^X_n, f_{n+1})}}\downarrow 
    && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{Hom(\sigma^X_n, Maps(S^1, f_{n+1})_\ast)}}
    \\
    Hom(S^1 \wedge S^1 \wedge X_n, Y_{n+1})
     &\overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}&
    Hom(S^1 \wedge X_n, Maps(S^1, Y_{n+1})_\ast)
  }
$$

through the adjunction naturality square. The other cases follow analogously.)

Then applying the adjunction isomorphism diagonally once more gives a further bijection to  commuting diagrams of this form:

$$
  \array{
    X_n &\overset{\widetilde {f_n}}{\longrightarrow}& Maps(S^1,Y_n)_\ast
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\tilde \sigma_n}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{Maps(S^1,\tilde \sigma^Y_n)_\ast}}
    \\
    Maps(S^1, X_{n+1})_\ast
      &\underset{Maps(S^1,\widetilde{f_{n+1}})_\ast}{\longrightarrow}&
    Maps\left(S^1, Maps(S^1,Y_{n+1})_\ast\right)_\ast
  }
  \,.
$$

This, finally, equivalently exhibits homomorphisms of the form

$$
  X \longrightarrow \Omega Y
$$

in the sense of def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumViaAdjunctStructureMaps}.

=--

In conclusion:

+-- {: .num_prop #StabilizationAdjunctionSquareExists}
###### Proposition

The following diagram of [[adjoint pairs]] of [[functors]] commutes:

$$
  \array{
     Top_{cg}^{\ast/}
      &
      \underoverset{\underoverset{\Omega}{\bot}{\longrightarrow}}{\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}{} 
      &
     Top^{\ast/}_{cg}
     \\
     {}^{\mathllap{\Sigma^\infty}}\downarrow \dashv \uparrow^{\mathrlap{\Omega^\infty}}
     &&
     {}^{\mathllap{\Sigma^\infty}}\downarrow \dashv \uparrow^{\mathrlap{\Omega^\infty}}
     \\
     SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
     &
     \underoverset
       {\underset{\Omega}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}
       {\bot}
     &
     SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
  }
  \,,
$$

Here the top horizontal adjunction is from prop. \ref{SuspensionAndLoopAdjunctionInClassicalHomotopyTheory}, the vertical adjunction is from prop. \ref{AdjunctionBetweenSmashTensoringAndPowering} and the bottom adjunction is from prop. \ref{AdjunctionsBetweenLoopingAndDeloopingForSeqSpec}.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

It is sufficient to check 

$$
  \Sigma^\infty \circ \Sigma \simeq \Sigma \circ \Sigma^\infty 
  \,.
$$

From this the statement

$$
  \Omega^\infty \circ \Omega \simeq \Omega \circ \Omega^\infty
$$

follows by uniqueness of adjoints.

So let $X \in Top_{cg}^{\ast/}$. Then 

* $(\Sigma \Sigma^\infty X)_n = S^1 \wedge S^n \wedge X$,

* $\sigma^{(\Sigma \Sigma^\infty X)}_n \colon S^1 \wedge S^1 \wedge S^n \wedge X \overset{S^1 \wedge id}{\longrightarrow} S^1 \wedge S^{1+n} \wedge X$,

while

* $(\Sigma^\infty \Sigma X)_n = S^n \wedge S^1 \wedge X$,


* $\sigma_n^{(\Sigma^\infty \Sigma X)}\colon S^1\wedge S^n \wedge S^1 \wedge X \overset{id \wedge S^1 \wedge X}{\longrightarrow} S^{1+n} \wedge S^1 \wedge X$,

where we write "id" for the canonical isomorphism. Clearly there is a natural isomorphism given by the canonical identifications

$$
  S^1 \wedge S^n \wedge X
    \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  (S^1)^{\wedge^{n+1}}\wedge X
     \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  S^n \wedge S^1 \wedge X
  \,.
$$

(As long as we are not smash-permuting the $S^1$ with the $S^n$ -- and here we don't -- then the fact that they get mixed under this isomorphism is irrelevant. The point where this does become relevant is the content of remark \ref{StandardAndAlternativeSuspensionAreNotDirectlyComparable} below.)

=--


##### As topological diagrams

The following is an equivalent reformulation of the component-wise definition of sequential spectra, def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}, as [[topologically enriched functors]] ([defn. ](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctor)). 


+-- {: .num_defn #CategoriesOfStandardSpheres}
###### Definition

Write 

$$
  \iota \;\colon\; StdSpheres \longrightarrow Top_{cg}^{\ast/}
$$

for the non-full [[topologically enriched category|topologically enriched]] [[subcategory]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopEnrichedCategory)) of that of [[pointed topological spaces|pointed]] [[compactly generated topological spaces]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopkAsATopologicallyEnrichedCategory)):

* [[objects]] are the standard [[n-spheres]] $S^n$, for $n \in \mathbb{N}$, identified as the [[smash product]] powers $S^n \coloneqq (S^1)^{\wedge^n}$ of the standard circle;

* [[hom-spaces]] are

  $$
    StdSpheres(S^{n}, S^{k+n})
      \coloneqq
    \left\{
      \array{
        \ast & for & k \lt 0
        \\
        S^k 
        & otherwise
      }
    \right.
  $$

* [[composition]] is induced from compistion in $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ by regarding the [[hom-space]] $S^k$ above as its [[image]] in $Maps({S^n},S^{k+n})_\ast$ under the [[adjunct]]

$$
  S^{k} \stackrel{}{\to} Maps({S^n},S^{k+n})_\ast
$$

of the canonical isomorphism

$$
  S^k \wedge S^n \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} S^{k+n}
  \,.
$$

This induces the category 

$$
  [StdSpheres, Top^{\ast/}_{cg}]
$$

of [[topologically enriched functors]] on $StdSpheres$ with values in $Top_{cg}^{\ast/}$ ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedFunctorsToTopk)).

=--


+-- {: .num_prop #SequentialSpectraAsDiagramSpectra}
###### Proposition

There is an [[equivalence of categories]]

$$
  (-)^seq
    \;\colon\;
  [StdSpheres,Top_{cg}^{\ast/}]
    \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
$$

from the category of [[topologically enriched functors]] on the category of standard spheres of def. \ref{CategoriesOfStandardSpheres} to the category of topological sequential spectra, def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}, which is given on objects by sending $X \in [StdSpheres,Top^{\ast/}]$ to the sequential prespectrum $X^{seq}$ with components

$$
  X^{seq}_n \coloneqq X(S^n)
$$

and with structure maps

$$
  \frac{
    S^1 \wedge X^{seq}_n \stackrel{\sigma_n}{\longrightarrow} X^{seq}_n
  }{
    S^1 \longrightarrow Maps(X^{seq}_n, X^{seq}_{n+1})_\ast
  }
$$

given by

$$
  S^1
    \stackrel{\widetilde{id}}{\longrightarrow}
  Maps(S^n,S^{n+1})_\ast
    \stackrel{X_{S^n, S^{n+1}}}{\longrightarrow}
  Maps(X^{seq}_n, X^{seq}_{n+1})
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #LimitsAndColimitsOfSequentialSpectra}
###### Proposition

The category $SeqSpec(Top_{cq})$ of sequential spectra (def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}) has all [[limits]] and [[colimits]], and they are computed objectwise: 

Given

$$
  X_\bullet
    \;\colon\;
  I
    \longrightarrow
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
$$

a [[diagram]] of sequential spectra, then:

1. its colimiting spectrum has component spaces the colimit of the component spaces formed in $Top_{cg}$ (via [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#DescriptionOfLimitsAndColimitsInTop) and [this corollary](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#kTopIsCoreflectiveSubcategory)):

   $$
     (\underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_i X(i))_n
     \simeq
      \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_i X(i)_n
      \,,
   $$

1. its limiting spectrum has component spaces the limit of the component spaces formed in $Top_{cg}$ (via [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#DescriptionOfLimitsAndColimitsInTop) and [this corollary](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#kTopIsCoreflectiveSubcategory)):

   $$
     (\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i X(i))_n
     \simeq
      \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i X(i)_n
      \,;
   $$

moreover:

1. the colimiting spectrum has structure maps in the sense of def. \ref{SequentialSpectra} given by

   $$
     S^1 \wedge (\underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_i X(i)_n)
     \simeq
     \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_i ( S^1 \wedge X(i)_n )
     \overset{\underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_i \sigma_n^{X(i)}}{\longrightarrow}
     \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_i X(i)_{n+1}
   $$

   where the first isomorphism exhibits that $S^1 \wedge(-)$ preserves all colimits, since it is a [[left adjoint]] by prop. \ref{SuspensionAndLoopAdjunctionInClassicalHomotopyTheory};

1. the limiting spectrum has adjunct structure maps in the sense of def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumViaAdjunctStructureMaps} given by

   $$
     \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i X(i)_n
      \overset{\underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i \tilde \sigma_n^{X(i)}}{\longrightarrow}
     \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i Maps(S^1, X(i)_n)_\ast 
     \simeq
     Maps(S^1, \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_i X(i)_n)_\ast
   $$

   where the last isomorphism exhibits that $Maps(S^1,-)_\ast$ preserves all limits, since it is a [[right adjoint]] by prop. \ref{SuspensionAndLoopAdjunctionInClassicalHomotopyTheory}.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

That the limits and colimits exist and are computed objectwise follows via prop. \ref{SequentialSpectraAsDiagramSpectra} from the general statement for categories of topological functors ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicallyEnrichedCopresheavesHaveAllLimitsAndColimits)). But it is also immediate to directly check the [[universal property]].

=--

+-- {: .num_example #WedgeSumOfSpectra}
###### Example

The [[coproduct]] of [[spectra]] $X, Y \in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$, called the **wedge sum of spectra** 

$$
  X \vee Y
    \coloneqq
  X \sqcup Y
$$

is componentwise the [[wedge sum]] of pointed topological spaces ([exmpl.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#WedgeSumAsCoproduct))

$$
  (X \vee Y)_n
  =
  X_n \vee Y_n
$$

with structure maps

$$
  \sigma_n^{X \vee Y}
    \;\colon\;
  S^1 \wedge (X \vee Y)
    \simeq
  S^1 \wedge X \,\vee\, S^1 \wedge Y
    \overset{(\sigma_n^X, \sigma_n^Y)}{\longrightarrow}
  X_{n+1} \vee Y_{n+1}
  \,.
$$


=--




### Omega-spectra


In order to motivate [[Omega-spectra]] consider the following shadow of the structure they will carry:

+-- {: .num_example #BlueprintForIdeaOfOmegaSpectra}
###### Example

A $\mathbb{Z}$-[[graded abelian group]] is equivalently a sequence $\{A_n\}_{n \mathbb{Z}}$ of $\mathbb{N}$-graded abelian groups $A_n$, together with isomorphisms

$$
  A_n \simeq A_{n+1}[1]
  \,,
$$

(where $[1]$ denotes the operation of shifting all entries in a graded abelian group down in degree by -1). Because this means that the sequence of $\mathbb{N}$-graded abelian groups is of the following form

$$
  \array{
    \vdots && \vdots 
    \\
    a_3 && a_2 && a_1 && \cdots
    \\
    a_2 && a_1 && a_0 && \cdots
    \\
    a_1 && a_0 && a_{-1} && \cdots
    \\
    \underset{A_0}{\underbrace{a_0}}
    &&
    \underset{A_1}{\underbrace{a_{-1}}}
    &&
    \underset{A_2}{\underbrace{a_{-2}}}
    &&
    \cdots
  }
  \,.
$$

This allows to recover the $\mathbb{Z}$-graded abelian group $\{a_n\}_{n \in \mathbb{Z}}$ from an $\mathbb{N}$-sequence of $\mathbb{N}$-graded abelian groups.

Then consider the case that the $\mathbb{N}$-graded abelian groups here are [[homotopy groups]] of some [[topological space]]. Then shifting the degree of the component groups corresponds to forming [[loop spaces]], because for any topological space $X$ then 

$$
  \pi_\bullet(\Omega X) 
  \simeq
  \pi_{\bullet + 1}(X)
  \,.
$$

(This may be seen concretely in point-set topology or abstractly by looking at the [[long exact sequence of homotopy groups]] for the fiber sequence $\Omega X \to Path_*(X) \to X$.)

We find this kind of behaviour for the stable homotopy groups of Omega-spectra below in example \ref{StableHomotopyGroupsOfOmegaSpectrum}.

=--


+-- {: .num_defn #OmegaSpectrum}
###### Definition

An **[[Omega-spectrum]]** is a [[sequential spectrum]] $X$ of topological spaces, def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}, such that the ([[smash product]] $\dashv$ [[pointed mapping space]])-[[adjuncts]] $\tilde \sigma_n$ of the structure maps $\sigma_n \colon \Sigma X_n \to X_{n+1}$ of $X$ are [[weak homotopy equivalences]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#WeakHomotopyEquivalenceOfTopologicalSpaces)), hence classical weak equivalences ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ClassesOfMorhismsInTopQuillen)):

$$
  \tilde \sigma_n
  \;\colon\;
  X_n  \stackrel{\in W_{cl}}{\longrightarrow}  Maps(S^1,X_{n+1})_\ast
$$

for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$.

Equivalently: an [[Omega-spectrum]] is a sequential spectrum in the incarnation of def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumViaAdjunctStructureMaps} such that all adjunct structure maps are weak homotopy equivalences.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #StableHomotopyGroups}
###### Definition

The **[[stable homotopy groups]]** of a [[sequential spectrum]] $X$, def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}, is the $\mathbb{Z}$-[[graded abelian group]] given by the [[colimit]] of [[homotopy groups]] of the component spaces

$$
  \pi_\bullet(X)
    \coloneqq
  \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_k
  \pi_{\bullet+k}(X_{k})
  \,,
$$

where the colimit is over the [[sequential diagram]] whose component morphisms are given in terms of the structure maps of def. \ref{SequentialSpectra} by

$$
  \pi_{q+k}(X_k)
    \overset{\simeq}{\to}
  [S^{q+k},X_k]_\ast
    \overset{(S^1\wedge(-))_{S^{q+k},X_k}}{\longrightarrow}
  [S^{q+k+1}, S^1 \wedge X_k]_\ast
    \overset{[S^{q+k+1}, \sigma_k]}{\longrightarrow}
  [S^{q+k+1}, X_{k+1}]_\ast
    \overset{\simeq}{\to}
  \pi_{q+k+1}(X_{k+1})
$$

and equivalently are given in terms of the adjunct structure maps of def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumViaAdjunctStructureMaps} by

$$
  \pi_{q+k}(X_k)
    \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  [S^{q+k}, X_k]_\ast
    \overset{[S^{q+k}, \tilde \sigma_k]}{\longrightarrow}
  [S^{q+k}, Maps(S^1,X_{k+1})_\ast]_\ast
    \simeq
  [S^1 \wedge S^{q+k}, X_{k+1}]_\ast
    \simeq
  \pi_{q+k+1}(X_{k+1})
  \,.
$$

This constitutes a [[functor]]

$$
  \pi_\bullet \;\colon\; SeqSpec(Top) \longrightarrow Ab^{\mathbb{Z}}
  \,.
$$


=--

+-- {: .num_prop #TwoVersionsOfComponentsForStableHomotopyGroupsAgree}
###### Proposition

The two component morphisms given in def. \ref{StableHomotopyGroups} indeed agree.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Consider the following instance of the defining naturality square of the $(S^1 \wedge (-)) \dashv Maps(S^1,-)_\ast$-adjunction of prop. \ref{SuspensionAndLoopAdjunctionInClassicalHomotopyTheory}: 

$$
  \array{
    [S^1 \wedge X_k, S^1 \wedge X_k]_\ast
      &\overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}&
    [X_k, Maps(S^1, S^1 \wedge X_k)_\ast]_\ast
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{[S^1 \wedge \alpha, \sigma_k]}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{[\alpha, Maps(S^1,\sigma_k)_\ast]_\ast}}
    \\
    [S^1 \wedge S^{q+k}, X_{k+1}]_\ast
      &\underset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}&
    [S^{q+k}, Maps(S^1, X_{k+1})_\ast]_\ast
  }
  \,.
$$

Then consider the identity element in the top left hom-set. Its image under the left vertical map is the first of the two given component morphisms. Its image under going around the other way is the second of the two component morphisms. By the commutativity of the diagram, these two images agree.

=--

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

Given $X \in Top_{cg}$, then the [[stable homotopy groups]] (def. \ref{StableHomotopyGroups}) of its [[suspension spectrum]] (example \ref{SuspensionSpectrum}) are given by

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \pi_q^S(X)
      & \;\coloneqq\;
    \pi_q(\Sigma^\infty X)
    \\
      & =
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_{k} \pi_{q + k}(S^k \wedge X)
    \\
      & \simeq
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_{k} \pi_{q}(\Omega^k ( \Sigma^k X))
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Specifically for $X = S^0$ the [[0-sphere]], with suspension spectrum the standard [[sphere spectrum]] (def. \ref{StandardSphereSpectrum}), its stable homotopy groups are the [[stable homotopy groups of spheres]]:

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \pi_q^S(S^0)
      & \;\coloneqq\;
    \pi_q(\mathbb{S})
    \\
      & =
    \underset{\longleftarrow}{\lim}_{k} \pi_{q + k}(S^k)
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Recall the [[Freudenthal suspension theorem]], which states that if $X$ is an [[n-connected topological space|n-connected]] pointed [[CW-complex]] then the comparison map

$$
  \pi_{q}(X) \longrightarrow \pi_{q+1}(\Sigma X)
$$

is an isomorphism for $q \leq 2n$. This implies first of all that every $\Sigma^k X$ is $(k-1)$-connected

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \pi_0(\Sigma X) & \simeq \ast
    \\    
    \pi_1(\Sigma^2 X) & \simeq \pi_0(\Sigma X) \simeq \ast
    \\
    \pi_2(\Sigma^3 X) & \simeq \pi_1(\Sigma^2 X) \simeq \pi_0(\Sigma X) \simeq \ast
    \\
    \cdots
  \end{aligned}
$$

and then that the $q$th stable homotopy group of $X$ is attained at stage $k = q+2$ in the colimit:

$$
  \pi^S_q(X) \simeq \pi_{q + (q+2)}(\Sigma^{q+2}X)
  \,.
$$
 
Historically, this fact was one of the motivations for finding a [[stable homotopy category]] (def. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategory} below). 

=--


+-- {: .num_defn #StableWeakHomotopyEquivalenceOfSequentialTopologicalSpectra}
###### Definition

A morphism $f \colon X \longrightarrow Y$ of [[sequential spectra]], def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}, is called a **[[stable weak homotopy equivalence]]**, if its image under the [[stable homotopy group]]-functor of def. \ref{StableHomotopyGroups} is an [[isomorphism]]

$$
  \pi_\bullet(f) 
    \;\colon\; 
  \pi_\bullet(X) 
    \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  \pi_\bullet(Y)
  \,.
$$

=--



+-- {: .num_example #StableHomotopyGroupsOfOmegaSpectrum}
###### Example

If a [[sequential spectrum]] $X$ is an [[Omega-spectrum]], def. \ref{OmegaSpectrum}, then its colimiting [[stable homotopy groups]] reduce to the actual homotopy groups of the component spaces, in that:

$$
  X \; \text{Omega-spectrum}
  \;\;\;\;\;
   \Rightarrow
  \;\;\;\;\;
  \pi_k(X)
    \simeq
  \left\{
    \array{
      \pi_k X_0  & if\; k \geq 0
      \\
      \pi_0 X_k  & if \; k \lt 0
    }
  \right.
  \,.
$$

(Hence the stable homotopy groups of an Omega-spectrum realize the general pattern discussed in example \ref{BlueprintForIdeaOfOmegaSpectra}.)

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

For an Omega-spectrum, the adjunct structure maps $\tilde \sigma_X$ are [[weak homotopy equivalences]], by definition, hence are classical weak equivalences. Hence $[S^1, \tilde \sigma_n]_\ast$ is an isomorphism ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#UniversalPropertyOfHomotopyCategoryOfAModelCategory)). Therefore, by prop. \ref{TwoVersionsOfComponentsForStableHomotopyGroupsAgree}, the [[sequential colimit]] in def. \ref{StableHomotopyGroups} is entirely over isomorphisms and hence is given already by the first object of the sequence.

=--





## The strict model structure on sequential spectra
 {#TheStrictModelStructure}

The [[model category]] structure on [[sequential spectra]] which [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presents]] [[stable homotopy theory]] is the "stable model structure" discussed [below](#TheStableModelStructure). Its fibrant objects are [[Omega-spectra]], hence are the proper [[spectrum objects]] among the pre-spectrum objects.

But for technical purposes it is useful to also be able to speak of a model structure on pre-spectra, which sees their homotopy theory as sequences of simplicial sets equipped with suspension maps, but not their stable structure. This is called the "strict model structure" for sequential spectra. Its main point is that the stable model structure of interest arises fromit via [[Bousfield localization of model categories|left Bousfield localization]].


+-- {: .num_defn #ClassesOfMorphismsOfTheStrictModelStructureOnSequentialSpectra}
###### Definition

Say that a homomorphism $f_\bullet \colon X_\bullet \to Y_\bullet$ in the category $SeqSpec(Top)$, def. \ref{SequentialSpectra} is

* a **strict weak equivalence** if each component $f_n \colon X_n \to Y_n$ is a weak equivalence in the [[classical model structure on topological spaces]] (hence a [[weak homotopy equivalence]]);

* a **strict fibration** if each component $f_n \colon X_n \to Y_n$ is a fibration in the [[classical model structure on topological spaces]] (hence a [[Serre fibration]]);

* a **strict cofibration** if the maps $f_0\colon X_0 \to Y_0$ as well as all [[pushout products]] of $f_n$ with the structure maps of $X$

  $$
    X_{n+1}\underset{S^1 \wedge X_n}{\coprod} S^1 \wedge Y_n
    \longrightarrow
    Y_{n+1}
  $$

  are cofibrations in the  [[classical model structure on topological spaces]] (i.e.: [[retracts]] of [[relative cell complexes]]) for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$;

We write $W_{strict}$, $Fib_{strict}$ and $Cof_{strict}$ for these classes of morphisms, respectively.

=--

Recall the sets

$$
  I_{Top^{\ast/}} \coloneqq \{S^{n-1}_+ \overset{(\iota_n)_+}{\longrightarrow} D^n_+\}_{n \in \mathbb{N}}
$$

$$
  J_{Top^{\ast/}} \coloneqq \{D^n \overset{(id,\delta_0)_+}{\longrightarrow} D^n \times I\}_{n \in \mathbb{N}}
$$

of standard generating cofibrations and generating acyclic cofibrations, respectively, of the [[classical model structure on pointed topological spaces]].


+-- {: .num_defn #GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForSeqSpecStrict}
###### Definition

Write

$$
  I_{SeqSpec}^{strict} 
    \coloneqq 
  \left\{ 
    y(S^n) \cdot i_+ 
  \right\}_{{S^n \in StdSpheres} \atop {i_+ \in I_{Top^{\ast/}}}}
  \;\;
  \in [StdSpheres, Top^{\ast/}] \simeq SeqSpec(Top)
$$

and

$$
  J_{SeqSpec}^{strict}
    \coloneqq 
  \left\{ 
    y(S^n) \otimes j_+ 
  \right\}_{{ S^n \in StdSpheres} \atop {j_+ \in J_{Top^{\ast/}}}}
  \;\;
  \in [StdSpheres, Top^{\ast/}] \simeq SeqSpec(Top)
  \,,
$$

for the set of morphisms arising as the [[tensoring]] of a [[representable functor|representable]] with a generating acyclic cofibration of the [[classical model structure on pointed topological spaces]].

=--


+-- {: .num_theorem #StrictModelStructureOnSequentialPrespectraIsModelCategory}
###### Theorem

The classes of morphisms in def. \ref{ClassesOfMorphismsOfTheStrictModelStructureOnSequentialSpectra} give the structure of a [[model category]] $SeqSpec(Top)_{strict}$, called the **strict model structure** or **level model structure** on sequential spectra.

This is a [[cofibrantly generated model category]] with generating (acyclic) cofibrations the set $I_{SeqSpec}^{strict}$ (resp. $J_{SeqSpec}^{strict}$) from def. \ref{GeneratingAndGeneratingAcyclicCofibrationsForSeqSpecStrict}.

=--


+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Prop. \ref{SequentialSpectraAsDiagramSpectra} says that the category of sequential spectra is [[equivalence of categories|equivalently]] an  [[enriched functor category]]

$$
  SeqSpec(Top)
  \simeq
  [StdSpheres, Top_{cg}^{\ast}]
  \,.
$$

Accordingly, this carries the [[projective model structure on enriched functors]], and unwinding the definitions, this gives the statement for the fibrations and the weak equivalences.

It only remains to check that the cofibrations are as claimed. To that end, consider a [[commuting square]] of sequential spectra

$$
  \array{
    X_\bullet &\stackrel{h_\bullet}{\longrightarrow}& A_\bullet
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f_\bullet}} && \downarrow
    \\
    Y_\bullet &\longrightarrow& B_\bullet
  }
  \,.
$$

By definition, this is equivalently a $\mathbb{N}$-collection of commuting diagrams of simplicial sets of the form

$$
  \array{
    X_n &\stackrel{h_n}{\longrightarrow}& A_n
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f_n}} && \downarrow
    \\
    Y_n &\longrightarrow& B_n
  }
$$

such that all structure maps are respected.

$$
  \array{
    S^1 \wedge X_n &\stackrel{\sigma_n^X}{\longrightarrow}& X_{n+1}
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{S^1 \wedge f_n}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f_{n+1}}}
    \\
    S^1 \wedge Y_n &\stackrel{\sigma_n^Y}{\longrightarrow}& Y_{n+1}
    \\
    & \searrow && \searrow
    \\
    && S^1 \wedge B_n &\stackrel{\sigma_n^B}{\longrightarrow}& B_{n+1}
  }
  \;\;\;
  \Rightarrow
  \;\;\;
  \array{
    S^1 \wedge X_n &\stackrel{\sigma_n^X}{\longrightarrow}& X_{n+1}
    \\
    & \searrow^{\mathrlap{S^1 \wedge h_n}} && \searrow^{\mathrlap{h_{n+1}}}
    \\
    && S^1 \wedge A_n &\stackrel{\sigma_n^A}{\longrightarrow}& A_{n+1}
    \\
    && \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    && S^1 \wedge B_n &\stackrel{\sigma_n^B}{\longrightarrow}& B_{n+1}
  }
  \,.
$$

Hence a [[lifting]] in the original diagram is a lifting in each degree $n$, such that the lifting in degree $n+1$ makes these diagrams of structure maps commute.

Since components are parameterized over $\mathbb{N}$, this condition has solutions by [[induction]]. First of all there must be an ordinary lifting in degree 0. Then assume a lifting $l_n$ in degree $n$ has been found

$$
  \array{
    X_n &\stackrel{h_n}{\longrightarrow}& A_n
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f_n}} &\nearrow_{\mathrlap{l_n}}& \downarrow
    \\
    Y_n &\longrightarrow& B_n
  }
$$

the lifting $l_{n+1}$ in the next degree has to also make the following diagram commute

$$
  \array{
    S^1 \wedge X_n &\stackrel{\sigma_n^X}{\longrightarrow}& X_{n+1}
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{S^1 \wedge f_n}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f_{n+1}}}
    & \searrow^{\mathrlap{h_{n+1}}}
    \\
    S^1 \wedge Y_n &\stackrel{\sigma_n^Y}{\longrightarrow}& Y_{n+1}
    && 
    \\
    & \searrow^{\mathrlap{S^1 \wedge l_n}} && \searrow^{\mathrlap{l_{n+1}}} & \downarrow
    \\
    && S^1 \wedge A_n &\stackrel{\sigma_n^A}{\longrightarrow}& A_{n+1}
  }
  \,.
$$

This is a [[cocone]] under the commuting square for the structure maps, and therefore the outer diagram is equivalently a morphism out of the [[domain]] of the [[pushout product]] $f_n \Box \sigma_n^X$, while the compatible lift $l_{n+1}$ is equivalently a lift against this pushout product:

$$
  \array{
    S^1 \wedge Y_n 
      \underset{S^1 \wedge X_n}{\sqcup} 
    X_{n+1}
    &\stackrel{(\sigma_n^A \circ S^1 \wedge l_n,h_{n+1})}{\longrightarrow}&
    A_{n+1}
    \\
    \downarrow &{}^{\mathllap{l_{n+1}}}\nearrow& \downarrow
    \\
    Y_{n+1} &\stackrel{}{\longrightarrow}& B_{n+1}
  }
  \,.
$$



=--


## The stable model structure on sequential spectra
 {#TheStableModelStructure}


### Omega-spectrification


+-- {: .num_defn #SpectrificationForTopologicalSequentialSpectra}
###### Definition

For $X \in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$, define a spectrum $Q X \in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ 
to be called the **[[Omega-spectrification]]** of $X$,
and define a morphism

$$
  j_X \;\colon\; X \longrightarrow Q X
$$

as follows.

First introduce for the given components $X_k$ and adjunct structure maps $\tilde \sigma_k$ of $X$ (from def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumViaAdjunctStructureMaps}) the notation

$$
  Z_{0,k} \coloneqq X_{k}
  \,,
  \;\;\;\;\;\;
  \tilde \sigma_{0,k} \coloneqq \tilde \sigma_k
  \,.
$$

Now assume, by [[induction]], that sets of objects $\{Z_{i,k}\}_{k \in \mathbb{N}}$ and maps $\{Z_{i,k} \overset{\tilde \sigma_{i,k}}{\to} \Omega Z_{i,k+1}\}_{k \in \mathbb{N}}$ have been constructed for some $i \in \mathbb{N}$. 

Then construct $Z_{i+1,k}\in Top_{cg}$ by factorizing $\tilde \sigma_{i,k}$, with respect to the model structure $(Top^{\ast/}_{cg})_{Quillen}$ ([thm.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ClassicalModelStructureOnCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpaces))  as a classical cofibration followed by a classical weak equivalence. More specifically, apply the [[small object argument]] ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#SmallObjectArgument)) with respect to the set of generating cofibrations $I_{Top}$ ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicalGeneratingCofibrations)) to produce [[functorial factorizations]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#FunctorialWeakFactorizationSystem)) into a [[relative cell complex]] followed by a [[weak homotopy equivalence]] (just as in the proof of [this lemma](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#FactorizationInTopQuillen)):

$$
  \tilde \sigma_{i,k}
    \;\colon\;
  Z_{i,k}
   \underoverset{\in I_{Top} Cell}{\iota_{i,k}}{\longrightarrow}
  Z_{i+1,k}
   \underoverset{\in W_{cl}}{\phi_{i,k}}{\longrightarrow}
  \Omega Z_{i,k+1}
  \,.
$$

Then define $\tilde \sigma_{i+1,k}$ as the composite

$$
  \tilde \sigma_{i+1,k}
    \;\colon\;
  Z_{i+1,k}
    \overset{\phi_{i,k}}{\longrightarrow}
  \Omega Z_{i,k+1}
    \overset{\Omega (\iota_{i,k+1})}{\longrightarrow}
  \Omega Z_{i+1,k+1} 
  \,.
$$

This produces for each $i \in \mathbb{N}$ a [[commuting diagram]] of the form

$$
  \array{
    X_k = Z_{0,k}
     &\underoverset{\in I_{Top} Cell}{\iota_{0,k}}{\longrightarrow}&
    Z_{1,k}
     &\underoverset{\in I_{Top} Cell}{\iota_{1,k}}{\longrightarrow}&
    Z_{2,k}
     &\underoverset{\in I_{Top} Cell}{\iota_{2,k}}{\longrightarrow}&
    \cdots
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\tilde \sigma_k = \tilde \sigma_{0,k}}}\downarrow
    &&
    {}^{\mathllap{\tilde \sigma_{1,k}}}\downarrow
    &&
    {}^{\mathllap{\tilde \sigma_{2,k}}}\downarrow
    &&
    \cdots
    \\
    \Omega X_{k+1}
    =
    \Omega Z_{0,k+1}
    &\overset{\Omega (\iota_{0,k+1})}{\longrightarrow}&
    \Omega Z_{1,k+1}
    &\overset{\Omega (\iota_{1,k+1})}{\longrightarrow}&
    \Omega Z_{2,k+1}
    &\overset{\Omega (\iota_{2,k+1})}{\longrightarrow}&
    \cdots
  }
  \,.
$$

That this indeed commutes is the identity

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \tilde \sigma_{i+1,k} \circ \iota_{i,k}
    & =
    (\Omega(\iota_{i,k+1}) \circ \phi_{i,k}) \circ \iota_{i,k}
    \\
    & =
    \Omega(\iota_{i,k+1}) \circ (\phi_{i,k} \circ \iota_{i,k})
    \\
    & = 
    \Omega(\iota_{i,k+1}) \circ \tilde \sigma_{i,k}
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Now let $Q X$ be the spectrum with component spaces the [[colimit]] 

$$
  (Q X)_k \coloneqq \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_i Z_{i,k}
$$

and with adjunct structure maps (via def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumViaAdjunctStructureMaps}) given by the map induced under colimits by the above diagrams

$$
  \tilde \sigma^{Q X}_k
  \;\coloneqq\;
  \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim} \tilde \sigma_{i,k}
  \;\colon\;
  Q X 
  \longrightarrow \Omega(Q X)
  \,.
$$

Notice that this is indeed well-defined: since each component map $X_{i,k} \to X_{i+1,k}$ is a [[relative cell complex]] and since the [[1-spheres]] $S^1$  is [[compact topological space|compact]], it follows ([lemma](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#CompactSubsetsAreSmallInCellComplexes)) that 

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_{i} \Omega Z_{i,k}
      & =
    \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_{i} Maps(S^1, Z_{i,k})_\ast
    \\
    & \simeq
    Maps(S^1, \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_i Z_{i,k} )_\ast
    \\
     & =  \Omega \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_i Z_{i,k}
    \\
    & \simeq (\Omega Q X)
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$


Finally, let 

$$
  j_X \colon X \to Q X
$$ 

be degreewise the inclusion of the first component ($i = 0$) into the colimit. By construction, this is a homomorphism of sequential spectra (according to def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumViaAdjunctStructureMaps}).


=--

+-- {: .num_prop #PropertiesOfSpectrificationForTopologicalSequentialSpectra}
###### Proposition

Let $X\in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ be a [[sequential prespectrum]] with $j_X \colon X \to Q X$ from def. \ref{SpectrificationForTopologicalSequentialSpectra}. Then:

1. $Q X$ is an [[Omega-spectrum]] (def. \ref{OmegaSpectrum});

1. $j_X \colon X \to Q X$ is a [[stable weak homotopy equivalence]] (def. \ref{StableWeakHomotopyEquivalenceOfSequentialTopologicalSpectra}):

1. if $X$ is an [[Omega-spectrum]], then $j_X$ is a level weak equivalence (is in $W_{strict}$, def. \ref{ClassesOfMorphismsOfTheStrictModelStructureOnSequentialSpectra});

1. if $f \colon X  \to Y$ is a [[stable weak homotopy equivalence]] (def. \ref{StableWeakHomotopyEquivalenceOfSequentialTopologicalSpectra}), then $Q f \colon Q X \to Q Y$ is a level weak equivalence (is in $W_{strict}$, def. \ref{ClassesOfMorphismsOfTheStrictModelStructureOnSequentialSpectra}).

=--

([Schwede 97, lemma 2.1.3](#Schwede97))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Since the colimit defining $Q X$ is a [[transfinite composition]] of [[relative cell complexes]], each component map $X_k \to (Q X)_k$ is itself a relative cell complex. Since [[n-spheres]] are [[compact topological spaces]], it follows ([lemma](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#CompactSubsetsAreSmallInCellComplexes)) that each element of a [[homotopy group]] in $\pi_\bullet((Q X)_k)$ is in the image of a finite stage $\pi_\bullet(Z_{i,k})$ for some $i \in \mathbb{N}$. From this, all statements follow by inspection at finite stages.

Regarding first statement: 

Since each $\tilde \sigma_{i,k}$ by construction is a weak homotopy equivalence followed by an inclusion of stages in the colimit, as any element of $\pi_q((Q X)_k)$ is sent along $\tilde \sigma^{Q X}_k$ it passes through one such $\pi_q(\tilde \sigma_{i ,k})$ at some stage $i$, hence also through all the following, and is hence identically preserved in the colimit. 

Regarding the second statement: 

By the previous statement and by example \ref{StableHomotopyGroupsOfOmegaSpectrum}, the map $\pi_\bullet(j_X) \colon \pi_\bullet(X)\to \pi_\bullet(Q X)$ is given in degree $q \geq 0$ by

$$
  \underset{
    \simeq \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_k  \pi_q \left(\Omega^k X_k\right)
  }
  {
  \underbrace{
    \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_{k \in \mathbb{N}}  \pi_{q+k}(X_k)
  }}
  \longrightarrow
  \underset{
    \simeq
    \pi_q \left(
      \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim}_k \Omega^k X_k
    \right)
  }{
  \underbrace{
    \pi_q \left(
      (Q X)_0
    \right)
  }}
$$

and similarly in degree $q\lt 0$. That these morphisms are isomorphism, hence that forming homotopy groups commutes over the sequential colimit of relative cell complex inclusions, is again due to the compactness of the $n$-spheres.

Regarding the third statement:

If $X$ is an Omega-spectrum in that all its adjunct structure maps $\tilde \sigma_k$ are [[weak homotopy equivalences]], then by [[two-out-of-three]] also the maps $\iota_{i,k}$ in def. \ref{SpectrificationForTopologicalSequentialSpectra} are weak homotopy equivalences. Hence $(j_X)_k \colon  X_k \to (Q X)_k$ is the map into a sequential colimit over acyclic relative cell complexes, and again by the compactness of the spheres, this means that it is itself a weak homotopy equivalence.

Similarly for the fourth statement.


=--


### Bousfield localization

In plain [[category theory]], a _[[localization]]_ of a [[category]] $\mathcal{C}$ is equivalently a [[full subcategory]]

$$
  i
    \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{C}_{loc}
    \hookrightarrow
  \mathcal{C}
$$

such that the inclusion functor has a [[left adjoint]] $L$

$$
  \mathcal{C}_{loc}
    \underoverset
      {\underset{i}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\overset{L}{\longleftarrow}}
      {\bot}
  \mathcal{C}
  \,.
$$

The [[adjunction unit]] $\eta_X \colon X \to L(X)$ "reflects" every object $X$ of $\mathcal{C}$ into one in the $\mathcal{C}_{loc}$, and therefore this is also called a _[[reflective subcategory]]_ inclusion.

It is a classical fact that in this situation

$$
  \mathcal{C}_{loc}
    \simeq
  \mathcal{C}[W^{-1}_L]
$$

is [[equivalence of categories|equivalently]] the [[localization]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#HomotopyCategoryOfACategoryWithWeakEquivalences)) of $\mathcal{C}$ at the "$L$-equivalences", namely at those morphisms $f$ such that $L(f)$ is an isomorphism. Hence one also speaks of _[[reflective localizations]]_.

The following concept of _[[Bousfield localization of model categories]]_ is the evident lift of this concept of [[reflective localization]] from the realm of categories to the realm of [[model categories]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ModelCategory)), where isomorphism is generealized to weak equivalence and where [[adjoint functors]] are taken to exhibit [[Quillen adjunctions]].
 
+-- {: .num_defn #BousfieldLocalizationOfModelCategories}
###### Definition


A **[[left Bousfield localization of model categories|left Bousfield localization]]** $\mathcal{C}_{loc}$ of a [[model category]] $\mathcal{C}$ ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ModelCategory)) is another model category structure on the same underlying category with the same cofibrations, 

$$
  Cof_{loc} = Cof
$$

but more weak equivalences

$$
  W_{loc} \supset W
  \,.
$$

=--

While that is a very simple definition, it turns out that something interesting happens to the fibrations when we keep the cofibrations fixed and increase the weak equivalences:

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

Given a [[left Bousfield localization of model categories|left Bousfield localization]] $\mathcal{C}_{loc}$ of $\mathcal{C}$ as in def. \ref{BousfieldLocalizationOfModelCategories}, then

1. $Fib_{loc} \subset Fib$;


1. $W_{loc} \cap Cof_{loc} = W \cap Cof$;

1. the identity functors constitute a [[Quillen adjunction]]

   $$
     \mathcal{C}_{loc}
       \underoverset
         {\underset{id}{\longrightarrow}}
         {\overset{id}{\longleftarrow}}
         {\bot}
     \mathcal{C}
     \,.
   $$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Regarding the first two items:

Using the properties of the [[weak factorization systems]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#WeakFactorizationSystem)) of (acyclic cofibratiojns, fibrations) and (cofibrations, acyclic fibrations) for both model structures we get

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    Fib_{loc} 
      &= 
    (Cof_{loc} \cap W_{loc})Inj
    \\
      &\subset 
    (Cof_{loc} \cap W)Inj 
    \\
      & = 
    Fib
  \end{aligned}
$$

and

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    Fib_{loc} \cap W_{loc}
      & =
    Cof_{loc} Inj 
    \\
      & = 
    Cof \, Inj 
    \\
      & = 
    Fib \cap W
  \end{aligned}
 \,.
$$

Regarding the third point:

By construction $id \colon \mathcal{C}_{loc}\to \mathcal{C}$ preserves cofibrations and acyclic cofibrations, hence is a left Quillen functor.

=--

In plain [[category theory]], given a [[reflective subcategory]] 

$$
  \mathcal{C}_{loc}
    \underoverset
      {\underset{i}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\overset{L}{\longleftarrow}}
      {\bot}
  \mathcal{C}
$$

then the composite

$$
  Q \coloneqq i \circ L  
    \;\colon\; 
  \mathcal{C} 
    \longrightarrow
  \mathcal{C}
$$

is an [[idempotent monad]] on $\mathcal{C}$, hence, in particular, an [[endofunctor]] equipped with a [[natural transformation]] $\eta_X \;\colon\; X \to L X$ (the [[adjunction unit]]) -- which "reflects" every object into one in the image of $L$ -- such that this reflection is a projection in that each $L(\eta_X)$ is an isomorphism. This characterizes the [[reflective subcategory]] $\mathcal{C}_{loc} \hookrightarrow \mathcal{C}$ as the subcategory of those objects $X$ for which $\eta_X$ is an isomorphism.

The following is the lift of this alternative perspective of reflective localization via idempotent monads from category theory to model category theory.


+-- {: .num_defn #QuillenIdempotentMonad}
###### Definition

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[model category]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ModelCategory)) which is [[right proper model category|right proper]], in that [[pullback]] along fibrations preserves weak equivalences.

Say that a **Quillen idempotent monad** on $\mathcal{C}$ is
 
1. an [[endofunctor]] 

   $Q \;\colon\;  \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}$

1. a [[natural transformation]]

   $\eta \colon id_{\mathcal{C}} \longrightarrow Q$

such that

1. ([[homotopical functor]]) $Q$ preserves weak equivalences;

1. (idempotency) for all $X \in \mathcal{C}$ the morphisms

   $$
     Q(\eta_X) \;\colon\; Q(X) \overset{\in W}{\longrightarrow} Q(Q(X))
   $$

   and

   $$
     \eta_{Q(X)} \;\colon\; Q(X) \overset{\in W}{\longrightarrow} Q(Q(X))
   $$

   are weak equivalences;

1. (preservation of homotopy pullbacks) if in a [[pullback]] square in $\mathcal{C}$

   $$
     \array{
       f^\ast W &\stackrel{f^\ast h}{\longrightarrow}& X
       \\
       \downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f}}
       \\
       W &\stackrel{h}{\longrightarrow}& Y
     }
   $$

   we have that

   1. $f$ is a fibration and $Y$ is fibrant;

   1. $\eta_X$, $\eta_Y$, and $Q(h)$ are weak equivalences

   then $Q(f^\ast h)$ is a weak equivalence.

=--


+-- {: .num_defn #ClassesOfMorphismsInBousfieldLocalizationAtQuillenIdempotentMonad}
###### Definition

For $Q \colon \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}$
a Quillen idempotent monad according to def. \ref{QuillenIdempotentMonad}, say that a morphism $f$ in $\mathcal{C}$ is

1. a **$Q$-weak equivalence** if $Q(f)$ is a weak equivalence;

1. **a $Q$-cofibation** if it is a cofibration.

1. **a $Q$-fibration** if it has the [[right lifting property]] against the morphisms that are both ($Q$-)cofibrations as well as $Q$-weak equivalences.

Write 

$$
  \mathcal{C}_Q
$$ 

for $\mathcal{C}$ equipped with these classes of morphisms. Notice that since $Q$ preserves weak equivalences (by def. \ref{QuillenIdempotentMonad}) then if these classes of morphisms do constitute a [[model category]] structure, then this is a [[Bousfield localization of model categories|left Bousfield localization]] of $\mathcal{C}$, according to def. \ref{BousfieldLocalizationOfModelCategories}.

=--



+-- {: .num_lemma #FirstLemmaForBousfieldFriedlander}
###### Lemma

In the situation of def. \ref{ClassesOfMorphismsInBousfieldLocalizationAtQuillenIdempotentMonad}, 
a morphism is an acyclic fibration in $\mathcal{C}_Q$ precisely if it is an acyclic fibration in $\mathcal{C}$.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

It is clear from the definition that an acyclic fibration is also a  $Q$-acyclic $Q$-fibration (since both are the class of moprhisms with [[right lifting property]] against the respective cofibrations, and the $Q$-cofibrations by definition are just the cofibrations). 

In the other direction, let $f \;\colon\; X \longrightarrow Y $ be a $Q$-acyclic $Q$-fibration. Consider its factorization into a cofibration followed by an acyclic fibration

$$
  f 
    \;\colon\; 
  X  
    \underoverset{\in Cof}{i}{\longrightarrow} 
  Z
    \underoverset{\in W \cap Fib}{p}{\longrightarrow}
  Y
  \,.
$$

Observe that $Q$-equivalences satisfy [[two-out-of-three]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#CategoryWithWeakEquivalences)), by functoriality and since the plain equivalences do. Now the assumption that $Q$ preserves weak equivalences together with [[two-out-of-three]] implies that $i$ is a $Q$-weak equivalence, hence a $Q$-acyclic $Q$-cofibration. This implies, by assumption on $f$, that $f$ has the [[right lifting property]] against $i$. Hence the [[retract argument]] ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#RetractArgument)), implies that $f$ is a [[retract]] of the acyclic fibration $p$, and so is itself an acyclic fibration.

=--

+-- {: .num_lemma #SecondLemmaForBousfieldFriedlander}
###### Lemma

In the situation of def. \ref{ClassesOfMorphismsInBousfieldLocalizationAtQuillenIdempotentMonad}, if a morphism $f \colon X \longrightarrow Y$ is a fibration, and $\eta_X, \eta_Y$ are weak equivalences, then $f$ is a $Q$-fibration.

=--

(e.g. [Goerss-Jardine 96, chapter X, lemma 4.4](#GoerssJardine96))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

We need to show that for every [[commuting square]] of the form

$$
  \array{
    A &\overset{\alpha}{\longrightarrow}& X
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{i}}_{\mathllap{\in W_Q \cap Cof_Q}}\downarrow 
     && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f}}
    \\
    B &\underset{\beta}{\longrightarrow}& Y
  }
$$

there exists a lifting.

To that end, first consider a factorization of the image under $Q$ of this square as follows:

$$
  \array{
    Q(A) &\overset{Q(\alpha)}{\longrightarrow}& Q(X)
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{Q(i)}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{Q(f)}}
    \\
    Q(B) &\underset{Q(\beta)}{\longrightarrow}& Q(Y)
  }
  \;\;\;\;\;\;
  \simeq
  \;\;\;\;\;\;
  \array{
    Q(A) 
     &\underoverset{\in W \cap Cof}{j_\alpha}{\longrightarrow}& 
    Z 
     &\underoverset{\in Fib}{p_\alpha}{\longrightarrow}& 
    Q(X)
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{Q(i)}}\downarrow 
      &&
    \downarrow^{\pi}
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{Q(f)}}
    \\
    Q(B) 
      &\underoverset{j_\beta}{\in W \cap Cof}{\longrightarrow}& 
    W 
      &\underoverset{p_\beta}{\in Fib}{\longrightarrow}& 
    Q(Y)
  }
$$

(This exists even without assuming [[functorial factorization]]: factor the bottom morphism, form the pullback of the resulting $p_\beta$, observe that this is still a fibration, and then factor (through $j_\alpha$) the universal morpism from the outer square into this pullback.)

Now consider the pullback of the right square above along the naturality square of $\eta \colon id \to Q$, take this to be the right square in the following diagram

$$
  \array{
    \alpha \colon
    & 
    A 
      &\overset{(j_\alpha \circ \eta_A, \alpha)}{\longrightarrow}&
    Z \underset{Q(X)}{\times} X
      &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    X
    \\
    & {}^{\mathllap{i}}\downarrow 
      &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{(\pi,f)}}
      &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f}}&
    \\
    \beta \colon 
    & 
    B 
      &\underset{(j_\beta\circ\eta_B,\beta)}{\longrightarrow}&
    W \underset{Q(Y)}{\times} Y
      &\underset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    Y
  }
  \,,
$$

where the left square is the universal morphism into the pullback which is induced from the naturality squares of $\eta$ on $\alpha$ and $\beta$.

We claim that $(\pi,f)$ here is a weak equivalence. This implies that we find the desired lift by factoring $(\pi,f)$ into an acyclic cofibration followed by an acyclic fibration and then lifting consecutively as follows

$$
  \array{
    \alpha \colon
    & 
    A 
      &\overset{(j_\alpha \circ \eta_A, \alpha)}{\longrightarrow}&
    Z \underset{Q(X)}{\times} X
      &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    X
    \\
    & {}^{\mathllap{id}}\downarrow 
      &&
    {}^{\mathllap{\in W \cap Cof}}\downarrow
      &{}^{\mathllap{\exists}}\nearrow&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f}}_{\mathrlap{\in Fib}}&
    \\
    & 
    A 
      &\longrightarrow& 
      &\overset{\phantom{AAAAAAA}}{\longrightarrow}&
    Y
    \\
    & {}^{\mathllap{i}}_{\mathllap{\in Cof}}\downarrow 
      &{}^{\mathllap{\exists}}\nearrow&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\in W \cap Fib}}
      &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id}}&
    \\
    \beta \colon & 
    B 
      &\underset{(j_\beta\circ\eta_B,\beta)}{\longrightarrow}&
    W \underset{Q(Y)}{\times} Y
      &\longrightarrow&
    Y
  }
  \,.
$$

To see that $(\phi,f)$ indeed is a weak equivalence:

Consider the diagram

$$
  \array{
     Q(A) 
       &\underoverset{\in W \cap Cof}{j_\alpha}{\longrightarrow}& 
     Z
       &\underoverset{\in W}{pr_1}{\longleftarrow}&
     Z \underset{Q(X)}{\times} X
     \\
     {}^{\mathllap{Q(i)}}_{\mathllap{\in W}}\downarrow 
       && 
     \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\pi}}
       && 
     \downarrow^{\mathrlap{(\pi,f)}}
     \\
     Q(B) 
       &\underoverset{j_\beta}{\in W \cap Cof}{\longrightarrow}& 
     Z
       &\underoverset{pr_2}{\in W}{\longleftarrow}&
     W \underset{Q(X)}{\times} X
  }
  \,.
$$

Here the projections are weak equivalences as shown, because by assumption in def. \ref{QuillenIdempotentMonad} the ambient model category is [[right proper model category|right proper]] and these projections are the pullbacks along the fibrations $p_\alpha$ and $p_\beta$ of the morphisms $\eta_X$ and $\eta_Y$, respectively, where the latter are weak equivalences by assumption. Moreover $Q(i)$ is a weak equivalence, since $i$ is a $Q$-weak equivalence.

Hence now it follows by [[two-out-of-three]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#CategoryWithWeakEquivalences)) that $\pi$ and then $(\pi,f)$ are weak equivalences.

=--


+-- {: .num_prop #BousfieldFriedlanderTheorem}
###### Proposition
**(Bousfield-Friedlander theorem)**

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[model category]]. Let $Q \colon \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}$
be a Quillen idempotent monad on according to def. \ref{QuillenIdempotentMonad}.

Then the [[Bousfield localization of model categories|Bousfield localization]] model category $\mathcal{C}_Q$ at the $Q$-weak equivalences (def. \ref{ClassesOfMorphismsInBousfieldLocalizationAtQuillenIdempotentMonad}) exists.

=--

([Bousfield-Friedlander 78, theorem 8.7](#BousfieldFriedlander78), [Bousfield 01, theorem 9.3 ](#Bousfield01), [Goerss-Jardine 96, lemma 4.5, lemma 4.6](#GoerssJardine96)) spring

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The existence of [[limits]] and [[colimits]] is guaranteed since $\mathcal{C}$ is already assumed to be a model category.
The [[two-out-of-three]] poperty for $Q$-weak equivalences is an immediate consequence of two-out-of-three for the original weak equivalences of $\mathcal{C}$. 

Moreover, according to lemma \ref{FirstLemmaForBousfieldFriedlander} the pair of classes $(Cof_{Q}, W_Q \cap Fib_Q)$ equals the pair $(Cof, W \cap Fib)$, and this is a [[weak factorization system]] by the model structure $\mathcal{C}$.

Hence it remains to show that $(W_Q \cap Cof_Q, \; Fib_Q)$ is a [[weak factorization system]]. The lifting property here holds by definition of $Fib_Q$. We conclude by showing the existence of factorizations:


First we consider the case of morphisms of the form $f \colon Q(Y) \to Q(Y)$. This may be factored with respect to $\mathcal{C}$ as

$$
  f 
  \;\colon\;
  Q(X)
    \underoverset{\in W \cap Cof}{\in i}{\longrightarrow}
  Z
    \underoverset{\in Fib}{p}{\longrightarrow}
  Q(Y)
  \,.
$$

Here $i$ is already a $Q$-acyclic $Q$-cofibration. Now apply $Q$ to obtain

$$
  \array{
  f 
  \colon
  &
  Q(X)
    &\underoverset{\in W \cap Cof}{i}{\longrightarrow}&
  Z
    &\underoverset{\in Fib}{p}{\longrightarrow}&
  Q(Y)
  \\
  &
  \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\eta_{Q(X)}}}_{\mathrlap{\in W}} 
    && 
  \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\eta_Z}} 
    && 
  \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\eta_{Q(Y)}}}_{\mathrlap{\in W}}
  \\
  &
  Q(Q(X))
    &\underoverset{Q(i)}{\in W}{\longrightarrow}&
  Z
    &\underset{}{\longrightarrow}&
  Q(Y)
  }
  \,,
$$

where $\eta_{Q(X)}$ and $\eta_{Q(Y)}$ are weak equivalences by idempotency, and $Q(i)$ is a weak equivalence since $Q$ preserves weak equivalences. Hence by [[two-out-of-three]] also $\eta_Z$ is a weak equivalence. Therefore lemma \ref{SecondLemmaForBousfieldFriedlander} gives that $p$ is a $Q$-fibration, and hence the above factorization is already as desired

$$
  f 
  \;\colon\;
  Q(X)
    \underoverset{\in W_Q \cap Cof_Q}{\in i}{\longrightarrow}
  Z
    \underoverset{\in Fib_Q}{p}{\longrightarrow}
  Q(Y)
  \,.
$$

Now for $g$ an arbitrary morphism $g \colon X \to Y$, form a factorization of $Q(g)$ as above and then decompose the naturality square for $\eta$ on $f$ into the pullback of the resulting $Q$-fibration along $\eta_Y$:

$$
  \array{
    g \colon
    & 
    X 
      &\overset{\tilde i}{\longrightarrow}&
    Z \underset{Q(Y)}{\times} Y
      &\overset{\tilde p}{\longrightarrow}&
    Y
    \\
    &
    {}^{\mathllap{\eta_X}}_{\mathllap{\in W_Q}}\downarrow 
      && 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\eta'}}_{\mathrlap{}} 
      &(pb)& 
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\eta_Y}}_{\mathrlap{\in W_Q}}
    \\
    Q(g)
    \colon
    &
    Q(Y)
      &\underoverset{i}{\in W_Q}{\longrightarrow}& 
    Z
      &\underoverset{p}{\in Fib_Q}{\longrightarrow}&
    Q(Y)
  }
  \,.
$$

This exhibits $\eta'$ as the pullback of a $Q$-weak equivalence along a $Q$-fibration, and hence itself as a $Q$-weak equivalence. This way, [[two-out-of-three]] implies that $\tilde i$ is a $Q$-weak equivalence.

Finally, apply factorization in $(Cof,\; W\cap Fib)$ to $\tilde i$ to obtain the desired factorization

$$
  f 
  \;\colon\;
  \overset{W_Q \cap Cof}{\longrightarrow}
  \overset{W \cap Fib = W_Q \cap Fib_Q}{\longrightarrow}
  \overset{Fib_Q}{\longrightarrow}
  \,.
$$

=--


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

For $Q \colon \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}$
a Quillen idempotent monad according to def. \ref{QuillenIdempotentMonad},
then in the model structure $\mathcal{C}_Q$ from prop. \ref{BousfieldFriedlanderTheorem},
a morphism $f\colon X \to Y$ is a $Q$-fibration precisely if 

1. $f$ is a fibration;

1. the $\eta$-naturality square on $f$ exhibits a [[homotopy pullback]]

   $$
     \array{
       X &\stackrel{\eta_X}{\longrightarrow}& Q(X)
       \\
       {}^{\mathllap{f}}\downarrow &{}^{(pb)^h}& \downarrow^{\mathrlap{Q(f)}}
       \\
       Y &\underset{\eta_Y}{\longrightarrow}& Q(Y)
     }
     \,.
   $$

=--


### Proof of the stable model structure

We show now that the operation of [[Omega-spectrification]] from def. \ref{SpectrificationForTopologicalSequentialSpectra} is a Quillen idempotent monad in the sense of def. \ref{QuillenIdempotentMonad}. Via the [[Bousfield-Friedlander theorem]] (prop. \ref{BousfieldFriedlanderTheorem}). This establishes a stable model structure on topological sequential spectra.

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The [[Omega-spectrification]] $(Q,j)$ from def. \ref{SpectrificationForTopologicalSequentialSpectra} is a Quillen idempotent monad in the sense of def. \ref{QuillenIdempotentMonad}. 

=--

([Schwede 97, lemma 2.1.3 (e), prop. 2.1.5](#Schwede97))


+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The first two conditions required on a Quillen idempotent monad in def. \ref{QuillenIdempotentMonad} are explicit in prop. \ref{PropertiesOfSpectrificationForTopologicalSequentialSpectra}. It remains to check the condition on pullbacks.

First we claim that given a [[pullback]] of a strict fibration

$$
  \array{
    X \underset{B}{\times}Y &\longrightarrow& Y
    \\
    \downarrow &(pb)& \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\in Fib_{strict}}}
    \\
    X &\longrightarrow& B
  }
$$

then for any factorization

$$
  Q(Y) 
    \overset{\in W_{strict} Cof_{strict}}{\longrightarrow} 
  \widehat {Q(Y)}
    \overset{\in Fib_{strict}}{\longrightarrow}
  Q(X)
$$

the induced morphism

$$
  Q(X \underset{B}{\times} Y)
    \longrightarrow
  Q(X)\underset{Q(B)}{\times} \widehat {Q(Y)}
$$

is a weak equivalence.

(...)

Now to see that this implies the pullback property in item 3 of \ref{QuillenIdempotentMonad}.

Since in $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}$ all objects are fibrant (a property directly inherited from $Top_{cg}^{\ast/}$) it follows (by [this lemma](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#InCfPullbackAlongFibrationPreservesWeakEquivalences)) that pullback along fibrations preserves weak equivalences. Hence

$$
  \array{
    Q(X \underset{B}{\times}Y) &\longrightarrow& Q(Y)
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\in W_{strict}}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\in W_{strict}}}
    \\
    X \underset{B}{\times} \widehat{Q X} &\overset{\in W_{strict}}{\longrightarrow}& \widehat{Q Y}
    \\
    \downarrow &(pb)& \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\in Fib_{strict}}}
    \\
    X &\underset{\in W_{strict}}{\longrightarrow}& B
  }
$$

Now it follows by [[two-out-of-three]] that also the top morphism is in $W_{strict}$.

=--



## Properties

We discuss properties of the stable model structure. One key property is that it is indeed the [[stabilization]] of the [[classical model structure on pointed topological spaces]]. Recall the following key property of that:

The _[[Introduction to Stable homotopy theory -- P|Prelude on Classical homotopy theory]]_ ended with the following phenomenon:

+-- {: .num_defn #SuspensionAndLoopingOnPointedTopologicalSpaces}
###### Definition

The [[reduced suspension]]/[[loop space object|looping]] operation on [[pointed topological space|pointed]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#CategoryOfPointedObjects)) [[compactly generated topological spaces]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#kTop)) is the smash-tensor/hom-[[adjunction]] ([cor.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#SmashHomAdjunctionOnPointedCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpaces)) for the standard [[1-sphere]] smash product form the left:

$$
  (\Sigma \dashv \Omega)
  \;\colon\;
  Top_{cg}^{\ast/}
   \;
   \underoverset
     {\underset{Maps(S^1,-)_\ast}{\longrightarrow}}
     {\overset{S^1 \wedge (-)}{\longleftarrow}}
     {\bot}
   \;
  Top_{cg}^{\ast/}
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #SuspensionAndLoopAdjunctionInClassicalHomotopyTheory}
###### Proposition

With respect to the [[classical model structure on pointed topological spaces|classical model structure]] on pointed compactly generated topological spaces $(Top^{\ast/}_{cg})_{Quillen}$ ([thm.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ClassicalModelStructureOnCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpaces), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ModelStructureOnSliceCategory))

1. the adjunction in def. \ref{SuspensionAndLoopingOnPointedTopologicalSpaces} is a [[Quillen adjunction]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#QuillenAdjunction))

   $$
     (\Sigma \dashv \Omega)
     \;\colon\;
     (Top_{cg}^{\ast/})_{Quillen}
      \underoverset
       {\underset{Maps(S^1,-)_\ast}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\overset{S^1 \wedge (-)}{\longleftarrow}}
       {\bot}
     (Top_{cg}^{\ast/})_{Quillen}
     \,,
   $$

1. its induced [[adjoint pair]] of [[derived functors]] on the [[classical pointed homotopy category]] (by [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#QuillenAdjunctionInducesAdjunctionOnHomotopyCategories)) is the canonical suspension/looping adjunction (according to [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LoopingAsFunctorOnHomotopyCategory))

   $$
     (\Sigma \dashv \Omega)
       \;\colon\;
     Ho(Top^{\ast/})
      \underoverset
        {\underset{\Omega}{\longrightarrow}}
        {\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}
        {\bot}
     Ho(Top^{\ast/})
     \,.
   $$

=--

See ([this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#SuspensionAndLoopAreAdjointOnHomotopyCategory)).


### CW-spectra
 {#FibrantAndCofibrantObjects}

+-- {: .num_defn #CWSpectrum}
###### Definition

A **[[CW-spectrum]]** is a [[sequential spectrum]] $X_\bullet\in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$, def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}, such that

1. all component spaces $X_n$ are [[CW-complexes]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TopologicalCellComplex)), 

1. all structure maps $\Sigma X_n \longrightarrow X_{n+1}$ are inclusions of subcomplexes 

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #ClosureOfCWSpectra}
###### Proposition

The class of CW-spectra is closed under the following operations

* finite [[wedge sum]] (def. \ref{WedgeSumOfSpectra})

* ...

=--


+-- {: .num_prop #CellSpectraAreCofibrantInModelStructureOnTopologicalSequentialSpectra}
###### Proposition

A [[sequential spectrum]] $X \in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ is cofibrant in the strict model structure $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}$ of theorem \ref{StrictModelStructureOnSequentialPrespectraIsModelCategory} in particular if all component spaces are [[cell complexes]] and all its structure morphisms $S^1 \wedge X_n \to X_{n+1}$ are [[relative cell complexes]]. In particular [[CW-spectra]], def. \ref{CWSpectrum}, are cofibrant in $SeqSpec(Top)_{strict}$.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

A morphism $\ast \to X$ is a cofibration according to def. \ref{ClassesOfMorphismsOfTheStrictModelStructureOnSequentialSpectra} if 

1. $X_0$ is cofibrant, hence a retract of a [[cell complex]];

1. $$
     \ast_{n+1}\underset{S^1 \wedge \ast_n}{\coprod} S^1 \wedge X_n
     \longrightarrow
     X_{n+1}
   $$

   is a cofibration. But in this case the [[pushout]] reduces to just its second summand, and so this is now equivalent to

   $$
     S^1 \wedge X_n \longrightarrow X_{n+1}
   $$

   being cofibrations; hence [[retracts]] of [[relative cell complexes]].

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #CylinderSpectrumOverCWSpectrumIsGood}
###### Proposition

For $X\in SeqSpec(Top)_{stable}$ a [[CW-spectrum]], then its standard [[cylinder spectrum]] $X \wedge (I_+)$ is a _good_ [[cylinder object]] in that the inclusion

$$
  X \vee X \longrightarrow X \wedge (I_+)
$$

is a cofibration in $SeqSpec(Top)_{stable}$.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

According to def. \ref{ClassesOfMorphismsOfTheStrictModelStructureOnSequentialSpectra} we need to check that for all $n$ the morphism

$$
  (X \vee X)_{n+1}
  \underset{S^1 \wedge (X\vee X)_n}{\sqcup}
  S^1 \wedge (X \wedge (I_+))_n
  \longrightarrow
  (X \wedge (I_+))_{n+1}
$$

is a retract of a relative cell complex. After distributing indices and smash products over wedge sums, this is equivalently

$$
  (X_{n+1} \vee X_{n+1})
  \underset{(S^1 \wedge X_n )\vee (S^1 \wedge X_n))}{\sqcup}
   S^1 \wedge X_n \wedge (I_+)
  \longrightarrow
  X_{n+1} \wedge (I_+)
  \,.
$$

Now by the assumption that $X$ is a [[CW-spectrum]], each $X_{n}$ is a CW-complex, and this implies that $X_n \wedge (I_+)$ is a relative cell complex in $Top^{\ast/}$. With this, inspection shows that also the above morphism is a relative cell complex.

=--

We now turn to discussion of [[CW-approximation]] of sequential spectra. First recall the relative version of CW-approximation for topological spaces:

+-- {: .num_lemma #nConnectedCWApproximationOfContinuousFunction}
###### Lemma

Let $f \;\colon\; A \longrightarrow X$ be a [[continuous function]] between [[topological spaces]]. Then there exists for each $n \in \mathbb{N}$ a [[relative CW-complex]] $\hat f \colon A \hookrightarrow \hat Y$ together with an [[extension]] $\phi \colon Y \to X$, i.e.

$$
  \array{
    A &\overset{f}{\longrightarrow}& X
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\hat f}}\downarrow & \nearrow_{\mathrlap{\phi}}
    \\
    \hat X
  }
$$ 

such that $\phi$ is [[n-connected continuous function|n-connected]].

Moreover:

* if $f$ itself is [[n-connected continuous function|k-connected]], then the relative CW-complex $\hat f$ may be chosen to have cells only of [[dimension]] $k + 1 \leq dim \leq n$.

* if $A$ is already a [[CW-complex]], then $\hat f \colon A \to X$ may be chosen to be a subcomplex inclusion.

=--

([tomDieck 08, theorem 8.6.1](CW+approximation#tomDieck08))

+-- {: .num_prop #CWApproximationForContinuousFunctions}
###### Proposition

For every [[continuous function]] $f \colon A \longrightarrow X$ out of a [[CW-complex]] $A$, there exists a [[relative CW-complex]] $\hat f \colon A \longrightarrow \hat X$ that factors $f$ followed by a [[weak homotopy equivalence]] 

$$
  \array{   
     A && \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} && X
     \\
     & {}_{\mathllap{\hat f}}\searrow && \nearrow_{\mathrlap{{\phi} \atop {\in WHE}}}
     \\
     && \hat X
  }
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Apply lemma \ref{nConnectedCWApproximationOfContinuousFunction} iteratively for all $n$ to produce a sequence with [[cocone]] of the form

$$
  \array{
    A &\overset{f_1}{\longrightarrow}& X_1 &\overset{f_2}{\longrightarrow}& X_2 &\longrightarrow & \cdots
    \\
    &{}_{\mathllap{f}}\searrow & \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\phi_1}} & \swarrow_{\mathrlap{\phi_2}} & \cdots 
    \\
    && X
  }
  \,,
$$

where each $f_i$ is a [[relative CW-complex]] and where $\phi_n$ in [[n-connected continuous function|n-connected]]. 

Let then $\hat X$ be the [[colimit]] over the sequence (its [[transfinite composition]]) and $\hat f \colon A \to X$ the induced component map. By definition of relative CW-complexes, this $\hat f$ is itself a relative CW-complex.

By the [[universal property]] of the colimit this factors $f$ as

$$
  \array{
    A &\overset{f_1}{\longrightarrow}& X_1 &\overset{f_2}{\longrightarrow}& X_2 &\longrightarrow & \cdots
    \\
    &{}_{\mathllap{}}\searrow & \downarrow^{\mathrlap{}} & \swarrow_{\mathrlap{}} & \cdots 
    \\
    && \hat X
    \\
    && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\phi}}
    \\
    && X
  }
  \,.
$$

Finally to see that $\phi$ is a weak homotopy equivalence: since [[n-spheres]] are [[compact topological spaces]], then every map $\alpha \colon S^n \to \hat X$ factors through a finite stage $i \in \mathbb{N}$ as $S^n \to X_i \to  \hat X$ (by [this lemma](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#CompactSubsetsAreSmallInCellComplexes)). By possibly including further into higher stages, we may choose $i \gt n$.  But then the above says that further mapping along $\hat X \to X$ is the same as mapping along $\phi_n$, which is $n$-connected and hence an isomorphism on the homotopy class of $\alpha$.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #CWApproximationForSequentialSpectra}
###### Proposition

For $X$ any topological [[sequential spectrum]] (def.\ref{SequentialSpectra}), then there exists a [[CW-spectrum]] $\hat X$ (def. \ref{CWSpectrum}) and a homomorphism 

$$
  \phi \colon  \hat X \overset{\in W_{strict}}{\longrightarrow} X
  \,.
$$ 

which is degreewise a [[weak homotopy equivalence]], hence a weak equivalence in the strict model structure of theorem \ref{StrictModelStructureOnSequentialPrespectraIsModelCategory}.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

First let $\hat X_0 \longrightarrow X_0$ be a CW-approximation of the component space in degree 0, via prop. \ref{CWApproximationForContinuousFunctions}. Then proceed by [[induction]]: suppose that for $n \in \mathbb{N}$ a [[CW-approximation]] $\phi_{k \leq n} \colon  \hat X_{k \leq n} \to X_{k \leq n}$ has been found such that all the structure maps are respected. Consider then the continuous function

$$
  \Sigma \hat X_n \overset{\Sigma \phi_n}{\longrightarrow} \Sigma X_n \overset{\sigma_n}{\longrightarrow} X_{n+1}
  \,.
$$

Applying prop. \ref{CWApproximationForContinuousFunctions} to this function factors it as

$$
  \Sigma X_n \hookrightarrow \hat X_{n+1} \overset{\phi_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow} X_{n+1}
  \,.
$$

Hence we have obtained the next stage of the CW-approximation. The respect for the structure maps is just this factorization property:

$$
  \array{  
    \Sigma \hat X_n 
      &\overset{\Sigma \phi_n}{\longrightarrow}& 
    \Sigma X_n
    \\
    {}^{incl}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma_n}}
    \\
    \hat X_{n+1} &\underset{\phi_{n+1}}{\longrightarrow}& X_{n+1}
  }
  \,.
$$

=--



### Looping and suspension

+-- {: .num_prop #SigmaInfinityIsQuillenOnStrictModelStructureOnSequential}
###### Proposition

The $(\Sigma^\infty \dashv \Omega^\infty)$-adjunction from prop. \ref{SigmaInfinityOmegaInfinity} is a [[Quillen adjunction]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#QuillenAdjunction)) between the [[classical model structure on pointed topological spaces]] ([thm.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ClassicalModelStructureOnCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpaces), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ModelStructureOnSliceCategory)) and the strict [[model structure on topological sequential spectra]] of theorem \ref{StrictModelStructureOnSequentialPrespectraIsModelCategory}:

$$
  (\Sigma^\infty \dashv \Omega^\infty)
  \;\colon\;
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}
    \underoverset
      {\underset{\Omega^{\infty}}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\overset{\Sigma^\infty}{\longleftarrow}}
      {\bot}
  (Top_{cg}^{\ast/})_{Quillen}
  \,.
$$


=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Let $f \colon X\longrightarrow Y$ be a morphism in $Top^{\ast/}_{cg}$ and 

$$
  \Sigma^\infty f \colon \Sigma^\infty X \longrightarrow \Sigma^\infty Y
$$

its image.

Since, the structure maps in a [[suspension spectrum]], example \ref{SuspensionSpectrum}, are all isomorphisms we have for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$ an isomorphism

$$
  (\Sigma^\infty X)_{n+1}
    \underset{S^1 \wedge (\Sigma^\infty X)_n}{\coprod} 
   S^1 \wedge (\Sigma^\infty Y)_n
    \simeq 
  S^1 \wedge (\Sigma^\infty Y)_n
  \,.
$$

Therefore $\Sigma^\infty f$ is a strict cofibration, according to def. \ref{ClassesOfMorphismsOfTheStrictModelStructureOnSequentialSpectra}, precisely if $(\Sigma^\infty f)_0 = f$ is a classical cofibration and all the structure maps of $\Sigma^\infty Y$ are classical cofibrations. But the latter are even isomorphisms, so that this is no extra condition. Hence $\Sigma^\infty$ sends cofibrations to cofibrations.

Furthermore, it is clear that $\Sigma^\infty$ sends weak equivalences to weak  equivalences. Hence it preserves also acyclic cofibrations, hence is a left Quillen functor.


=--

+-- {: .num_prop #AlternativeSuspensionIsLeftQuillenOnStrictModelStructureOnSequential}
###### Proposition

The $(\Sigma \dashv \Omega)$-[[adjunction]] from prop. \ref{AdjunctionsBetweenLoopingAndDeloopingForSeqSpec} is a [[Quillen adjunction]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#QuillenAdjunction)) with respect to the strict model structure on sequential spectra of theorem \ref{StrictModelStructureOnSequentialPrespectraIsModelCategory}.

$$
   SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}  
     \underoverset
       {\underset{\Omega}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}
       {\bot}
   SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}   
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Since the (acyclic) fibrations of $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}$ are by definition those morphisms that are degreewise (acylic) fibrations in $(Top^{\ast/}_{cg})_{Quillen}$, the statement follows immediately from the fact that the right adjoint $\Omega$ is degreewise given by $Maps(S^1, -)_\ast \colon (Top^{\ast/}_{cg})_{Quillen} \to (Top^{\ast/}_{cg})_{Quillen}$, which is a right Quillen functor by prop. \ref{SuspensionAndLoopAdjunctionInClassicalHomotopyTheory}.

=--

In summary, prop. \ref{StabilizationAdjunctionSquareExists}, prop. \ref{SigmaInfinityIsQuillenOnStrictModelStructureOnSequential} and prop.  \ref{AlternativeSuspensionIsLeftQuillenOnStrictModelStructureOnSequential} say that 

+-- {: .num_cor #SuspensionLoopingAdjunctionSystemForStrictModelStructure}
###### Corollary


The commuting square of adjunctions in prop. \ref{StabilizationAdjunctionSquareExists} is a square of [[Quillen adjunctions]] with respect to the [[classical model structure on pointed topological spaces|classical model structure]] on pointed compactly generated topological spaces ([thm.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ClassicalModelStructureOnCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpaces), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ModelStructureOnSliceCategory)) and the strict [[model structure on topological sequential spectra]] of theorem \ref{StrictModelStructureOnSequentialPrespectraIsModelCategory}:

$$
  \array{
     (Top_{cg}^{\ast/})_{Quillen}
      &
      \underoverset{\underoverset{\Omega}{\bot}{\longrightarrow}}{\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}{} 
      &
     (Top^{\ast/}_{cg})_{Quillen}
     \\
     {}^{\mathllap{\Sigma^\infty}}\downarrow \dashv \uparrow^{\mathrlap{\Omega^\infty}}
     &&
     {}^{\mathllap{\Sigma^\infty}}\downarrow \dashv \uparrow^{\mathrlap{\Omega^\infty}}
     \\
     SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}
     &
     \underoverset
       {\underset{\Omega}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}
       {\bot}
     &
     SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}
  }
  \,,
$$


=--





### Stability of the homotopy theory
 {#Stability}


We discuss that the stable model structure $SeqSpec(Top)_{stable}$ of theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentialSpectraIsModelCategory} is indeed a [[stable model category]] in that the canonical [[reduced suspension]] operation $\Sigma$ is an [[equivalence of categories]] from the [[stable homotopy category]] to itself. This is theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentiaSpectraIsStableModelCategory} below. 

+-- {: .num_defn #StableModelCategory}
###### Definition

A [[pointed category|pointed]] [[model category]] $\mathcal{C}$ is called a **[[stable model category]]** if the canonically induced [[reduced suspension]] and [[loop space object]]-[[functors]] ([prop. ](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LoopingAsFunctorOnHomotopyCategory)) on its [[homotopy category]] ([defn.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#HomotopyCategoryOfAModelCategory))is an [[equivalence of categories]]

$$
  (\Sigma \dashv \Omega)
  \;\colon\;
  Ho(\mathcal{C})
   \underoverset
     {\underset{\Omega}{\longrightarrow}}
     {\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}
     {\simeq}
  Ho(\mathcal{C})
  \,.
$$

=--

In order to prove that this is the case for $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ we first relate now the operations of "standard suspension" (def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumRealSuspension}) and of "alternative suspension" (def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumFakeSuspension}) to each other. The former is manifestly a model for the correct suspension, but the latter is better behaved, so we will show that they are naturally isomorphic in the stable homotopy category. According to remark \ref{StandardAndAlternativeSuspensionAreNotDirectlyComparable} both are directly comparable and isomorphic in even degrees, but non-comparable in odd degree. Therefore we now first introduce the concept of sequential spectra with components only in even degree and then use an adjunction back to ordinary sequential spectra.


+-- {: .num_defn #SequentialS2Spectra}
###### Definition

A **sequential $S^2$-spectrum** is a sequence of component spaces $X_{2n} \in Top_{cg}$ for $n \in \mathbb{N}$, and a sequence of structure maps of the form

$$
  \sigma_n \;\colon\; S^2 \wedge X_{2n}  \longrightarrow X_{2n+2}
  \,.
$$

A homomorphism of sequential $S^2$-spectra $f \colon X \to Y$ is a sequence of component maps $f_{2n} \;\colon\; X_{2n} \to Y_{2n}$ such that all these diagrams commute:

$$
  \array{
    S^2 \wedge X_{2n} &\overset{S^2 \wedge f_{2n}}{\longrightarrow}& Y_{2n}
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\sigma_n^{X}}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma_n^Y}}
    \\
    X_{2n+2} &\underset{f_{2n+2}}{\longrightarrow}& Y_{n+2}
  }
  \,.
$$

Write

$$
  Seq_2Spec(Top_{cg})
$$

for the resulting category of sequential $S^2$-spectra.

=--

+-- {: .num_lemma #AdjunctionBetweenSequentialSpectraAndSequentialS2Spectra}
###### Lemma

There is a pair of [[adjoint functors]]

$$
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})
    \underoverset  
     {\underset{R_2}{\longrightarrow}}
     {\overset{L_2}{\longleftarrow}}
     {\bot}
  Seq_2Spec(Top_{cg})
$$

between sequential spectra (def. \ref{SequentialSpectra}) and sequential $S^2$-spectra (def. \ref{SequentialS2Spectra})

* where $(R_2 X)_{2 n} \coloneqq X_{2 n}$ and 

  $$
    \sigma_n^{R_2 X} 
      \;\colon\;
    S^2 X_{2n}
      \simeq
    S^1 \wedge S^1 \wedge X_{2n}
      \overset{S^1 \wedge \sigma_{2n}^X}{\longrightarrow}
    S^1 \wedge X_{2n+1}
      \overset{\sigma_{2n+1}^X}{\longrightarrow}
    X_{2n+2}
  $$

* and where 

  $$
   (L_2 \mathcal{X})_n 
     \coloneqq 
   \left\{ 
     \array{ 
        \mathcal{X}_n & if \; n \; even  
        \\ 
        S^1 \wedge \mathcal{X}_{n-1} & if \; n \; odd
     }
   \right.
  $$ 

  and

  $$
    \sigma^{L_2 \mathcal{X}}_{n}
    =
    \left\{
      \array{
        id_{S^1 \wedge \mathcal{X}_n} & if \; n \; even
        \\
        \sigma^{\mathcal{X}}_n & if \; n \; odd
      }
    \right.
    \,.
  $$

Moreover, for each $X \in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$, the [[adjunction unit]]

$$
  L_2 R_2 X \longrightarrow X
$$

is a [[stable weak homotopy equivalence]] (def. \ref{StableWeakHomotopyEquivalenceOfSequentialTopologicalSpectra}) hence (by prop. \ref{StableWeakHomotopyEquivalenceIsStableEquivalence}) a stable weak equivalence.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

To see that we have an adjunction, consider a homomorphism

$$
  f \;\colon\;  L_2 \mathcal{X} \longrightarrow Y
  \,.
$$

Given its even-graded component maps, then its odd-graded component maps $f_{2n+1}$ need to fit into [[commuting squares]] of the form

$$
  \array{
    S^1 \wedge \mathcal{X}_{2n}
      &\overset{S^1 \wedge f_{2n}}{\longrightarrow}&
    S^1 \wedge Y_{2n}
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{id}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma_{2n}^Y}}
    \\
    S^1 \wedge \mathcal{X}_{2n} &\underset{f_{2n+1}}{\longrightarrow}&
    Y_{2n+1}
  }
  \,.
$$

Since here the left map is an identity, this uniquely fixes the odd-graded components $f_{2n+1}$ in terms of the even-graded components. Moreover, these components then make following pasting rectangles comute

$$
  \array{
    S^2 \wedge \mathcal{X}_{2n} &\overset{S^2 \wedge f_{2n}}{\longrightarrow}& 
    S^2 \wedge Y_{2 n}
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\simeq}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{S^1 \wedge \sigma_{2n}^Y}}
    \\
    S^2 \wedge \mathcal{X}_{2n} &\overset{S^1 \wedge f_{2n+1}}{\longrightarrow}& S^1 \wedge Y_{2n+1}
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\sigma_{2n}^{\mathcal{X}}}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\sigma_{2n+1}^Y}}
    \\
    \mathcal{X}_{2n+2} &\overset{f_{2n+2}}{\longrightarrow}& Y_{2n+2}
  }
  \,.
$$

This equivalently exhibits $f_\bullet$ as a homomorphism

$$
  \tilde f
    \;\colon\;
  \mathcal{X} \longrightarrow R_2 Y
  \,.
$$

Finally to see that the [[adjunction unit]] is a [[stable weak homotopy equivalence]]: for $X \in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ then the morphism of stable homotopy groups induced from 

$$
  L_2 R_2 X \longrightarrow X
$$

is in degree $q$

$$
  \array{
     \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim} (\cdots &\to& \pi_{q+2k}(X_{2k}) && \longrightarrow && \pi_{q+2k+2}(X_{q+2k+2}) &\to& \cdots ) &=& 
     \pi_q(L_2 R_2 X)
     \\
     && {}^{\mathllap{\simeq}}\downarrow && && {}^{\mathllap{\simeq}}\downarrow && && \downarrow
     \\
     \underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim} (\cdots &\to& \pi_{q+2k}(X_{2k}) &\longrightarrow& \pi_{2+2k+1}(X_{2k+1}) &\longrightarrow& \pi_{q+2k+2}(X_{q+2k+2}) &\to& \cdots ) &=& 
     \pi_q(X)
  }
  \,.
$$

From this it is clear that the induced vertical map on the right is an isomorphism. (Technically: the inclusion of [[partially ordered sets]] $\mathbb{N}_{even}^{\leq} \hookrightarrow \mathbb{N}^{\leq}$ is a [[cofinal functor]] and hence restriction along it preserves colimits.)

=--


+-- {: .num_lemma #IsomorphismBetweenStandardAndAlternativeSuspensionInHomotopyCategory}
###### Lemma

There is a [[natural isomorphism]] in the [[stable homotopy category]] (def. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategory}) between the total [[derived functors]] ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#QuillenAdjunctionInducesAdjunctionOnHomotopyCategories)) of the standard suspension (def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumRealSuspension}) and of the alternative suspension (def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumFakeSuspension}):

$$
  \Sigma (-)
   \; \simeq \;
  (-) \wedge S^1
  \;\;\;\;\;
  \in Ho(SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable})
$$

=--

(e.g. [Jardine 15, prop. 10.53](sequential#spectrum#Jardine15))

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Consider the adjunction $(L_2 \dashv R_2) \colon SeqSpec(Top) \leftrightarrow Seq_2Spec(Top)$ from lemma \ref{AdjunctionBetweenSequentialSpectraAndSequentialS2Spectra}.

Via the discussion in remark \ref{StandardAndAlternativeSuspensionAreNotDirectlyComparable}, there is a [[natural isomorphism]] in $Seq_2 Spec(Top)$ between the image under $R_2$ of the two suspension operations

$$
  \tau \;\colon\; R_2 (\Sigma(-)) \simeq R_2((-)\wedge S^1)
  \,,
$$

whose components are given by the [[smash product]]-[[braiding]] isomorphisms

$$
  S^2 \wedge (-) 
    \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  (-) \wedge S^2
  \,.
$$

By lemma \ref{AdjunctionBetweenSequentialSpectraAndSequentialS2Spectra} the [[adjunction unit]] is a stable weak equivalence, so that we get a natural [[zig-zag]] of stable weak equivalences:

$$
  \Sigma X
    \underset{\in W_{st}}{\longleftarrow} 
  L_2 R_2 (\Sigma X) 
    \underoverset{\in Iso \subset W_{st}}{L\tau}{\longrightarrow}
  L_2 R_2 (X \wedge S^1)
    \underset{\in W_{st}}{\longrightarrow}
  X \wedge S^1
  \,.
$$

So restricted to $X$ a cofibrant-object, this gives a natural isomorphism $\Sigma X \to X \wedge S^1$ in the [[stable homotopy category]] $Ho(SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable})$.

=--



+-- {: .num_lemma #FakeSuspensionInducesEquivalenceOfHomotopyCategories}
###### Lemma

The total [[derived functor]] of the alternative suspension operation $\Sigma$ of def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumFakeSuspension} exists and constitutes an [[equivalence of categories]] from the [[stable homotopy category]] to itself:

$$
  \Sigma
  \;\colon\;
  Ho(SeqSpec(Top)_{stable})
   \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  Ho(SeqSpec(Top)_{stable})
  \,.
$$


=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The total derived functor of $\Sigma$ exists because by prop. \ref{FakeLoopingPreservesOmegaSpectra} $\Sigma$ preserves stable equivalences. Also the shift functor $[-1]$ from def. \ref{ShiftedSpectrum} clearly preserves stable equivalences, hence both descend to the homotopy category. 
There, by prop. \ref{CounitOfFakeSuspensionAndShiftIsStableEquivalence}
and remark \ref{ShiftingCommutesWithLoopingAndSuspensionOfSequentialSpectra}, they are inverses of each other, up to isomorphism.

=--

+-- {: .num_lemma #StandardSuspensionOfSequentialSpectraRepresentsCanonicalSuspension}
###### Lemma

The canonical suspension functor on the [[homotopy category of a model category|homotopy category]] of any [[model category]] (from [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LoopingAsFunctorOnHomotopyCategory)) in the case of the [[stable homotopy category]] (def. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategory}) $Ho(Spectra) = Ho(SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable})$ is represented by the "standard suspension" operation of def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumRealSuspension}.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By [[CW-approximation]] (prop. \ref{CWApproximationForSequentialSpectra}), every object in the stable homotopy category is represented by a [[CW-spectrum]]. 
By prop. \ref{CylinderSpectrumOverCWSpectrumIsGood}, on [[CW-spectra]] the canonical suspension functor on the homotopy category (from [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LoopingAsFunctorOnHomotopyCategory)) is represented by the "standard suspension" operation of def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumRealSuspension}. 

=--

+-- {: .num_theorem #StableModelStructureOnSequentiaSpectraIsStableModelCategory}
###### Theorem

The stable model structure $SeqSpec(Top)_{stable}$ from theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentialSpectraIsModelCategory} indeed gives a [[stable model category]] (def. \ref{StableModelCategory}) in that the canonically induced [[reduced suspension]] functor ([prop. ](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LoopingAsFunctorOnHomotopyCategory)) on its [[homotopy category of a model category|homotopy category]] is an [[equivalence of categories]]

$$
  \Sigma 
    \;\colon\;
  Ho(SeqSpec(Top)_{stable})
   \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  Ho(SeqSpec(Top)_{stable})
  \,.
$$


=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By lemma \ref{StandardSuspensionOfSequentialSpectraRepresentsCanonicalSuspension}, the canonical suspension functor is represented, on fibrant-cofibrant objects, by the standard suspension functor of def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumRealSuspension}.
By prop. \ref{IsomorphismBetweenStandardAndAlternativeSuspensionInHomotopyCategory} however, this is naturally isomorphic -- on the level of the homotopy category -- to the alternative suspension operation of def. \ref{SequentialSpectrumFakeSuspension}. Therefore the claim follows with prop. \ref{FakeSuspensionInducesEquivalenceOfHomotopyCategories}.

=--

In fact this lifts to a Quillen equivalence:

+-- {: .num_prop #AlternativeLoopingAndSuspensionIsQuillenEquivalenceOnStableModelStructure}
###### Proposition

The $(\Sigma \dashv \Omega)$-[[adjunction]] from prop. \ref{AdjunctionsBetweenLoopingAndDeloopingForSeqSpec} is a [[Quillen equivalence]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#QuillenEquivalence)) with respect to the stable model structure of theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentialSpectraIsModelCategory}:

$$
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable}
    \underoverset
     {\underset{\Omega}{\longrightarrow}}
     {\overset{\Sigma}{\longrightarrow}}
     {\simeq_{\mathrlap{Q}}}
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable}
  \,.
$$


=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By prop. \ref{AlternativeSuspensionIsLeftQuillenOnStrictModelStructureOnSequential} and the fact that the stable model structure has the same cofibrations as the strict model structure,  $\Sigma$ preserves stable cofibrations. Moreover, by lemma \ref{FakeLoopingPreservesOmegaSpectra} $\Sigma$ preserves in fact all stable weak equivalences. Hence $\Sigma$ is a left Quillen functor and so $(\Sigma \dashv \Omega)$ is a [[Quillen adjunction]].

With this, lemma \ref{FakeSuspensionInducesEquivalenceOfHomotopyCategories} gives that this Quillen adjunction is a Quillen equivalence.

=--

In summary, this concludes the characterization of the [[stable homotopy category]] as the result of stabilizing the canonucal $(\Sigma \dashv \Omega)$-adjunction on the [[classical homotopy category]]:

+-- {: .num_cor #StableHomotopyCategoryIsIndeedStabilizationOfClassicalHomotopyCategory}
###### Corollary

The [[classical model structure on pointed topological spaces|classical model structure]] $(Top^{\ast/}_{cg})_{Quillen}$ on [[pointed topological space|pointed]] [[compactly generated topological spaces]] ([thm.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ClassicalModelStructureOnCompactlyGeneratedTopologicalSpaces), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ModelStructureOnSliceCategory)) and the stable [[model structure on topological sequential spectra]] $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$ (theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentialSpectraIsModelCategory}) sit in a [[commuting diagram]] of [[Quillen adjunctions]] of the form

$$
  \array{
     (Top_{cg}^{\ast/})_{Quillen}
      &
      \underoverset{\underoverset{\Omega}{\bot}{\longrightarrow}}{\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}{} 
      &
     (Top^{\ast/}_{cg})_{Quillen}
     \\
     {}^{\mathllap{\Sigma^\infty}}\downarrow \dashv \uparrow^{\mathrlap{\Omega^\infty}}
     &&
     {}^{\mathllap{\Sigma^\infty}}\downarrow \dashv \uparrow^{\mathrlap{\Omega^\infty}}
     \\
     SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}
     &
     \underoverset
       {\underset{\Omega}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}
       {\bot}
     &
     SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{strict}
     \\
     {}^{\mathllap{id}}\downarrow \dashv \uparrow^{\mathrlap{id}}
     &&
     {}^{\mathllap{id}}\downarrow \dashv \uparrow^{\mathrlap{id}}
     \\
     SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable}
     &
     \underoverset
       {\underset{\Omega}{\longrightarrow}}
       {\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}
       {\simeq_{\mathrlap{Q}}}
     &
     SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable}
  }
  \,,
$$

where the top parts is from corollary \ref{SuspensionLoopingAdjunctionSystemForStrictModelStructure}, the bottom vertical Quillen adjunction is the [[Bousfield localization of model categories|Bousfield localization]] of theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentialSpectraIsModelCategory} and the bottom horizontal adjunction is the [[Quillen equivalence]] of prop. \ref{AlternativeLoopingAndSuspensionIsQuillenEquivalenceOnStableModelStructure}.

Hence (by [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#QuillenAdjunctionInducesAdjunctionOnHomotopyCategories)) the [[derived functors]] of the functors in this diagram yield a commuting square of [[adjoint functors]] between the [[classical homotopy category]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ClassicalHomotopyCategory)) and the [[stable homotopy category]] (def. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategory}) of the form

$$
  \array{
    Ho(Top^{\ast/})
    &
      \underoverset
        {\underset{\Omega}{\longrightarrow}}
        {\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}
        {\bot}
    &
    Ho(Top^{\ast/})
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\Sigma^\infty}}\downarrow \dashv \uparrow^{\mathrlap{\Omega^\infty}}
    &&
    {}^{\mathllap{\Sigma^\infty}}\downarrow \dashv \uparrow^{\mathrlap{\Omega^\infty}}
    \\
    Ho(Spectra)
    &
      \underoverset
        {\underset{\Omega}{\longrightarrow}}
        {\overset{\Sigma}{\longleftarrow}}
        {\simeq}
    &
    Ho(Spectra)
  }
  \,,
$$

and here the horizontal adjunctions are the canonically induced (via [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LoopingAsFunctorOnHomotopyCategory))suspension/looping functors by prop. \ref{SuspensionAndLoopAdjunctionInClassicalHomotopyTheory} and by lemma \ref{StandardSuspensionOfSequentialSpectraRepresentsCanonicalSuspension} and theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentiaSpectraIsStableModelCategory}.


=--

### The stable homotopy category 


+-- {: .num_defn #TheStableHomotopyCategory}
###### Definition

Write

$$
  Ho(Spectra)
  \coloneqq
  Ho(SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable})
$$

for the [[homotopy category of a model category|homotopy category]] of the stable [[model structure on topological sequential spectra]] from theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentialSpectraIsModelCategory}. 

This is called the **[[stable homotopy category]]**.

=--

The [[stable homotopy category]] of def. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategory} inherits particularly nice properties that are usefully axiomatized for themselves. This axiomatics is called _[[triangulated category]]_ structure (def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences} below) where the "triangles" are referring to the structure of the long fiber sequences and long cofiber sequences ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LongFiberSequence)) which happen to coincide in stable homotopy theory.

#### Additivity
 {#AdditivityOfTheStableHomotopyCategory}


+-- {: .num_lemma #StableHomotopyCategoryHasCoproducts}
###### Lemma

The [[stable homotopy category]] (def. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategory}) has [[finite product|finite]] [[coproducts]]. They are represented by [[wedge sums]] (example \ref{WedgeSumOfSpectra}) of [[CW-spectra]] (def. \ref{CWSpectrum}).

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Having finite coproducts means having empty coproducts, which are [[initial objects]], and having binary coproducts. 

Regarding the initial object:

The spectrum $\Sigma^\infty \ast$ ([[suspension spectrum]] (example \ref{SuspensionSpectrum}) on the point) is both an [[initial object]] and a [[terminal object]] in $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$. This implies in particular that it is both fibrant and cofibrant. Finally its standard [[cylinder spectrum]] (example \ref{StandardCylinderSpectrumSequential}) is trivial $(\Sigma^\infty \ast) \wedge (I_+)\simeq \Sigma^\infty \ast$. All together with means that for $X$ any fibrant-cofibrant spectrum, then 

$$
  Hom_{Ho(Spectra)}(\Sigma^\infty \ast, Z)
  \simeq
  Hom_{SeqSpec}(\Sigma^\infty \ast, Z)/_\sim
  \simeq
  \ast
  \,.
$$

Now regarding binary coproducts:

By prop. \ref{CWApproximationForSequentialSpectra} and prop. \ref{CellSpectraAreCofibrantInModelStructureOnTopologicalSequentialSpectra}, every spectrum has a cofibrant replacement by a [[CW-spectrum]]. By prop. \ref{ClosureOfCWSpectra} the [[wedge sum]] $X \wedge Y$ of two CW-spectra is still a CW-spectrum, hence still cofibrant. 

Let $P$ and $Q$ be fibrant and cofibrant replacement functors, respectively, as in _[Prelude -- The homotopy category](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#TheHomotopyCategory).

We claim now that $P(X \wedge Y) \in Ho(Spectra)$ is the coproduct of $P X$ with $P Y$ in $Ho(Spectra)$. By definition of the [[homotopy category of a model category|homotopy category]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#HomotopyCategoryOfAModelCategory)) this is equivalent to claiming that for $Z$ any stable fibrant spectrum then there is a [[natural isomorphism]]

$$
  Hom_{SeqSpec}(P(X \wedge Y), Q Z)/_\sim
  \simeq
  Hom_{SeqSpec}(P X, Q Z)/_\sim \times Hom_{SeqSpec}(P Y, Q Z)/_\sim
$$

between [[left homotopy]]-classes of morphisms of sequential spectra.

But since $X \vee Y$ is cofibrant and $Z$ is fibrant, there is a natural isomorphism ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#HomsOutOfCofibrantIntoFibrantComputeHomotopyCategory))

$$
  Hom_{SeqSpec}(P(X \wedge Y), Q Z)/_\sim
  \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  Hom_{SeqSpec}(X \wedge Y, Z)/_\sim  
  \,.
$$

Now the wedge sum $X \vee Y$ is the coproduct in $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$, and hence morphisms out of it are indeed in natural bijection with pairs of morphisms out of the two summands. But we need this property to hold still after dividing out left homotopy. The key is that smash tensoring (def. \ref{TensoringAndPoweringOfSequentialSpectra}) distributes over wedge sum

$$
  (X \vee Y) \wedge (I_+) \simeq (X \wedge (I_+)) \vee (Y\wedge (I_+))
$$

(due to the fact that the [[smash product]] of compactly generated [[pointed topological spaces]] distributes this way over wedge sum of pointed spaces). This means that also left homotopies out of $X \vee Y$ are in natural bijection with pairs of left homotopies out of the summands separately, and hence that there is a natural isomorphism

$$
  Hom_{SeqSpec}(X \wedge Y, Z)/_\sim  
  \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  Hom_{SeqSpec}(X,Z)/_\sim \times Hom_{SeqSpec}(Y,Z)/_\sim
  \,.
$$

Finally we may apply the inverse of the natural isomorphism used before ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#HomsOutOfCofibrantIntoFibrantComputeHomotopyCategory)) to obtain in total

$$
  Hom_{SeqSpec}(X,Z)/_\sim \times Hom_{SeqSpec}(Y,Z)/_\sim
  \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  Hom_{SeqSpec}(P X,Q Z)/_\sim \times Hom_{SeqSpec}(P Y,Q Z)/_\sim
  \,.
$$

The composite of all these isomorphisms proves the claim.

=--

+-- {: .num_lemma #StableHomotopyCategoryIsAbEnriched}
###### Lemma

Consider the group structure on [[hom-sets]] of the [[stable homotopy category]] (def. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategory}) which is induced from the fact ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LoopingAsFunctorOnHomotopyCategory)) that the [[hom-sets]] of any [[homotopy category of a model category|homotopy category]] into an object in the image of the canonical loop space functor $\Omega$ inherit group structure, together with the fact (theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentiaSpectraIsStableModelCategory}) that on the [[stable homotopy category]] $\Omega$ has an inverse $\Sigma$, so that

$$
  Hom_{Ho(Spectra)}(X,Y)
  \simeq
  Hom_{(Ho(Spectra))}(X, \Omega \Sigma Y)
  \,.
$$

This group structure is [[abelian group|abelian]] and [[composition]] is [[bilinear map|bilinear]] with respect to it. (Hence this makes $Ho(Spectra)$ an _[[Ab-enriched category]]_.)

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Recall ([prop](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LoopingAsFunctorOnHomotopyCategory), [rmk.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ConcatenatedLoopSpaceObject)) that the group structure is given by concatenation of loops 

$$
  X 
    \overset{\Delta_X}{\to}
  X \times X
    \overset{(f,g)}{\longrightarrow}
  \Omega \Sigma X \times \Omega \Sigma X
  \overset{}{\longrightarrow}
  \Omega \Sigma X
  \,.
$$


That the group structure is abelian follows via the [[Eckmann-Hilton argument]] from the fact that there is always a compatible second (and indeed arbitrarily many compatible) further group structures, since 

$$
  Hom_{Ho(Spectra)}(X,Y)
    \simeq
  Hom_{(Ho(Spectra))}(X, \Omega \Sigma Y)
    \simeq
  Hom_{(Ho(Spectra))}(X, \Omega \circ (\Omega \Sigma) \circ \Sigma Y)
    =
  Hom_{(Ho(Spectra))}(X, \Omega^2 \Sigma^2 Y)
  \,.
$$

That composition distributes over composition in this group structure is the naturality of the loop composition map, which is evident from the standard model ([rmk.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#ConcatenatedLoopSpaceObject))

$$
  \array{
    \Omega \Sigma X \times \Omega \Sigma X
    &\longrightarrow&
    \Omega \Sigma X
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{(f,f)}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f}}
    \\
    \Omega \Sigma Y \times \Omega \Sigma Y
    &\longrightarrow&
    \Omega \Sigma Y
  }
  \,.
$$

=--

In summary, lemma \ref{StableHomotopyCategoryHasCoproducts} and lemma \ref{StableHomotopyCategoryIsAbEnriched} state that the [[stable homotopy category]] is an [[Ab-enriched category]] with finite [[coproducts]]. This is called an _[[additive category]]_:
 
+-- {: .num_defn #AdditiveCategory}
###### Definition

An **[[additive category]]** is a [[category]] which is

1. an [[Ab-enriched category]];

   (sometimes called a [[pre-additive category]]--this means that each [[hom-set]] carries the structure of an [[abelian group]] and composition is [[bilinear map|bilinear]])

1. which admits [[finite limit|finite]] [[coproducts]] 

   (and hence, by prop. \ref{ProductsAreBiproducts} below, finite [[products]] which coincide with the coproducts, hence finite [[biproducts]]).

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #ProductsAreBiproducts}
###### Proposition

In an [[Ab-enriched category]], a [[finite product|finite]] [[product]] is also a [[coproduct]], and dually.  

This statement includes the zero-ary case: any [[terminal object]] is also an [[initial object]], hence a [[zero object]] (and dually), hence every [[additive category]] (def. \ref{AdditiveCategory}) has a [[zero object]].  

More precisely, for $\{X_i\}_{i \in I}$ a [[finite set]] of objects in an Ab-enriched category, then the unique morphism 

$$
  \underset{i \in I}{\coprod} X_i \longrightarrow \underset{j \in I}{\prod} X_j
$$

whose components are identities for $i = j$ and are [[zero morphism|zero]] otherwise is an [[isomorphism]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Consider first the zero-ary case. Given an [[initial object]] $\emptyset$ and a [[terminal object]] $\ast$, observe that since the [[hom-sets]] $Hom(\emptyset,\emptyset)$ and $Hom(\ast,\ast)$ by definition contain a single element, this element has to be the zero element in the abelian group structure. But it also has to be the identity morphism, and hence $id_\emptyset = 0$ and $id_{\ast} = 0$. It follows that the 0-element in $Hom(\ast, \emptyset)$ is a left and right inverse to the unique element in $Hom(\emptyset,\ast)$, and so this is an [[isomorphism]]

$$
  0 \;\colon\; \emptyset \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} \ast
  \,.
$$

Consider now the case of binary (co-)products. Using the existence of the [[zero object]], hence of [[zero morphisms]], then in addition to its canonical [[projection]] maps $p_i \colon X_1 \times X_2 \to X_i$, any binary [[product]] also receives "injection" maps $X_i \to X_1 \times X_2$, and dually for the [[coproduct]]:

$$
  \array{  
    X_1 && && X_2
    \\
    & \searrow^{\mathrlap{(id,0)}} && {}^{\mathllap{(0,id)}}\swarrow
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{id_{X_1}}}\downarrow && X_1 \times X_2 && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id_{X_2}}}
    \\
    & \swarrow_{\mathrlap{p_{X_1}}} && {}_{\mathllap{p_{X_2}}}\searrow
    \\
    X_1 && && X_2
  }
  \;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\,,\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;
  \array{  
    X_1 && && X_2
    \\
    & \searrow^{\mathrlap{i_{X_1}}} && {}^{\mathllap{i_{X_2}}}\swarrow
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{id_{X_1}}}\downarrow 
     && X_1 \sqcup X_2 && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id_{X_2}}}
    \\
    & \swarrow_{\mathrlap{(id,0)}} && {}_{\mathllap{(0,id)}}\searrow
    \\
    X_1 && && X_2
  }
  \,.
$$

Then using the additivity of morphisms, it follows that for $f_i \;\colon\; X_i \to Q$ any two morphisms, the sum 

$$
  \phi \;\colon\; f_1 \circ p_1 + f_2 \circ p_2
$$

gives a morphism of [[cocones]]

$$
  \array{  
    X_1 && && X_2
    \\
    & \searrow^{\mathrlap{(id,0)}} && {}^{\mathllap{(0,id)}}\swarrow
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{id_{X_1}}}\downarrow && X_1 \times X_2 && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id_{X_2}}}
    \\
    &  && 
    \\
    X_1 && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\phi}} && X_2
    \\
    & {}_{\mathllap{f_1}}\searrow && \swarrow_{\mathrlap{f_2}}
    \\
    && Q
  }
  \,.
$$

Moreover, this is in fact unique: suppose $\phi'$ is another morphism filling this diagram, then 

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    (\phi-\phi')
    & = 
    (\phi - \phi') \circ id_{X_1 \times X_2}
    \\
    &= 
    (\phi - \phi') \circ ( (id_{X_1},0) \circ p_1 + (0,id_{X_2})\circ p_2 )
    \\
    & =
    \underset{ = 0}{\underbrace{(\phi - \phi') \circ (id_{X_1}, 0)}} \circ p_1
    + 
    \underset{ = 0}{\underbrace{(\phi - \phi') \circ (0, id_{X_2})}} \circ p_2
    \\
    & = 0
  \end{aligned}
$$

and hence $\phi = \phi'$. This means that $X_1\times X_2$ satisfies the [[universal property]] of a [[coproduct]].

By a [[formal dual|dual]] argument, the binary coproduct $X_1 \sqcup X_2$ is seen to also satisfy the universal property of the binary product. By [[induction]], this implies the statement for all finite (co-)products.

=--


+-- {: .num_remark #BiproductsInAdditiveCategories}
###### Remark

Finite coproducts coinciding with products as in prop. \ref{ProductsAreBiproducts} ar also called _[[biproducts]]_ or _[[direct sums]]_, denoted

$$
  X_1 \oplus X_2 \coloneqq X_1 \sqcup X_2 \simeq X_1 \times X_2
  \,.
$$

The [[zero object]] is denoted "0", of course.

=--

Conversely:

+-- {: .num_defn #SemiadditiveCategory}
###### Definition

A **[[semiadditive category]]** is a [[category]] that has all [[finite products]] which, moreover, are [[biproducts]] in that they coincide with finite [[coproducts]] as in def. \ref{ProductsAreBiproducts}.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #SemiAdditivityInducesAbelianMonoidEnrichment}
###### Proposition

In a [[semiadditive category]], def. \ref{SemiadditiveCategory}, the [[hom-sets]] acquire the structure of [[commutative monoids]] by defining the sum of two morphisms $f,g \;\colon\; X \longrightarrow Y$ to be

$$
  f + g 
    \;\coloneqq\;
  X \overset{\Delta_X}{\to} X \times X
  \simeq
  X \oplus X
  \overset{f \oplus g}{\longrightarrow}
  Y \oplus Y
  \simeq
  Y \sqcup Y
  \overset{\nabla_X}{\to}
  Y
  \,.
$$

With respect to this operation, [[composition]] is [[bilinear map|bilinear]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The [[associativity]] and commutativity of $+$ follows directly from the corresponding properties of $\oplus$. Bilinearity of composition follows from [[natural transformation|naturality]] of the [[diagonal]] $\Delta_X$ and [[codiagonal]] $\nabla_X$.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #SemiaddtiveStructureUnderlyingAdditiveInducesOriginalEnrichment}
###### Proposition

Given an [[additive category]] according to def. \ref{AdditiveCategory}, then the enrichement in [[commutative monoids]] which is induced on it via prop. \ref{ProductsAreBiproducts} and prop. \ref{SemiAdditivityInducesAbelianMonoidEnrichment} from its underlying [[semiadditive category]] structure coincides with the original enrichment.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

We may write the formula for the addition of two morphisms induced by semiadditve structure equivalently as

$$
  f+g \;\colon\; 
  X \overset{\Delta_X}{\to} X \times X
  \overset{(f,g)}{\longrightarrow}
  Y \times Y
  \overset{p_1 + p_2}{\longrightarrow}
  Y
$$

where the last morphism is identified as the sum of the two projections as in the proof of prop. \ref{ProductsAreBiproducts}. This implies the claim.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

Prop. \ref{SemiaddtiveStructureUnderlyingAdditiveInducesOriginalEnrichment} says that being an [[additive category]] is an extra [[property]] on a category, not extra [[structure]]. We may ask whether a given category is additive or not, without specifying beforehand with respect to which abelian group structure on the hom-sets.

=--

In conclusion we have:

+-- {: .num_prop #TheStableHomotopyCategoryIsAdditive}
###### Proposition

The [[stable homotopy category]] (def. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategory}) is an [[additive category]] (def. \ref{AdditiveCategory}).

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By lemma \ref{StableHomotopyCategoryHasCoproducts} and lemma \ref{StableHomotopyCategoryIsAbEnriched}.

=--

Hence prop. \ref{ProductsAreBiproducts} implies that in the stable homotopy category finite coproducts and finite products agree, in that they are finite [[biproducts]]. We may also check this explicitly:

+-- {: .num_lemma}
###### Lemma

For $X,Y \in SeqSpec(Top_{cg})$, then the canonical morphism

$$
  X \vee Y 
   \longrightarrow
  X \times Y
$$

out of the [[coproduct]] ([[wedge sum]], example \ref{WedgeSumOfSpectra}) into the [[product]] (via prop. \ref{LimitsAndColimitsOfSequentialSpectra}), given by

$$
  \array{  
    X && && Y
    \\
    & \searrow^{\mathrlap{i_X}} && {}^{\mathllap{i_X}}\swarrow
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{id_X}}\downarrow 
     && X \sqcup Y && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id_Y}}
    \\
    & \swarrow_{\mathrlap{(id,0)}} && {}_{\mathllap{(0,id)}}\searrow
    \\
    X && && Y
    \\
    & \searrow^{\mathrlap{(id,0)}} && {}^{\mathllap{(0,id)}}\swarrow
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{id_X}}\downarrow && X \times Y && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id_Y}}
    \\
    & \swarrow_{\mathrlap{p_X}} && {}_{\mathllap{p_Y}}\searrow
    \\
    X && && Y
  }
$$

represents an [[isomorphism]] in the [[stable homotopy category]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

We may represent both $X$ and $Y$ by [[CW-spectra]] in $(SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable})_c[W_{st}^{-1}]$. Then the canonical morphism 

$$
  i_X \colon X \longrightarrow X \vee Y
$$

is a stable cofibration, because $X_{n+1}\underset{S^1 \wedge X_n}{\sqcup} S^1 (X \vee Y) \simeq X_{n+1} \vee S^1 \wedge Y_n$.

Hence its ordinary cofiber, which is $Y$,  is its homotopy cofiber, hence we have a homotopy cofiber sequence

$$
  X \longrightarrow X \vee Y \longrightarrow Y
$$

moreover, under forming [[stable homotopy groups]], the the inclusion map evidently gives an injection, and the projection map gives a surjection. Hence the [[long exact sequence of homotopy groups]] gives a [[short exact sequence]]

$$
  0 \to
  \pi_\bullet(X)
  \longrightarrow
  \pi_\bullet(X \vee Y)
  \longrightarrow
  \pi_\bullet(Y)
  \to 
  0
  \,.
$$

Moreover, due to the fact that the inclusion and projection for one of the two summands constitute a [[retraction]], this is a [[split exact sequence]], hence exhibits an isomorphism

$$
  \pi_k(X \vee Y)  
  \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow}
  \pi_k(X)\oplus \pi_k(Y)
$$

for all $k$. But this just says that $X \vee Y \to X \times Y$ is a [[stable weak homotopy equivalence]].

=--



#### Triangulated structure
 {#TriangulatedStructure}



+-- {: .num_defn #CategoryWithCofiberSequences}
###### Definition

A **[[triangulated category]]** is

1. an [[additive category]] $Ho$ (def. \ref{AdditiveCategory});

1. a functor, called the **suspension functor** or **[[shift functor]]**

   $$
     \Sigma \;\colon\; Ho \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} Ho
   $$

   which is required to be an [[equivalence of categories]];

1. a sub-[[class]] $CofSeq \subset Mor(Ho^{\Delta[3]})$ of the class of triples of composable morphisms, called the class of **distinguished triangles**, where each element is of the form

   $$
     A \overset{}{\longrightarrow} B \overset{}{\longrightarrow}  \overset{}{\longrightarrow} \Sigma A
     \,,
   $$

   which is also denoted as

   $$
     \array{
        A && \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} && B
        \\
        & {}_{\mathllap{[1]}}\nwarrow && \swarrow_{\mathrlap{}}
        \\
        && B/A
     }
   $$

   (whence the name);

such that the following conditions hold:

* **T0** If $(f,g,h)$ is a distinguished triangle and there is a [[commuting diagram]] in $Ho$ of the form

  $$
    \array{    
     A &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& B &\overset{g}{\longrightarrow}& B/A &\overset{h}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma A      
     \\
     \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\in Iso}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\in Iso}} 
     && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\in Iso}}
     && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\in Iso}}
     \\
     A' &\overset{f'}{\longrightarrow}& B' &\overset{g'}{\longrightarrow}& B'/A' &\overset{h'}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma A'      
     
    }
  $$

  then $(f',g',h')$ is also a distinguished triangle;
  
  Moreover, for every morphism $f \colon A \to B$ there is a distinguished triangle of the form

  $$
    A \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} B \longrightarrow B/A \longrightarrow \Sigma A
    \,.
  $$

* **T1** For every object $X \in Ho$ then $(0,id_X,0)$ is a distinguished triangle

  $$
    0 \longrightarrow X \overset{id_X}{\longrightarrow} X 
    \overset{}{\longrightarrow} 0
    \,;
  $$


* **T2** If $(f,g,h)$ is a distinguished triangle, then so is $(g,h, - \Sigma f)$; hence if

  $$
    A \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} B \overset{g}{\longrightarrow} B/A \overset{h}{\longrightarrow} \Sigma A
  $$

  is, then so is

  $$
    B \overset{g}{\longrightarrow} B/A \overset{h}{\longrightarrow} \Sigma A \overset{-\Sigma f}{\longrightarrow} \Sigma B
    \,.
  $$

* **T3** Given a [[commuting diagram]] in $Ho$ of the form

  $$
    \array{    
     A &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& 
     B &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& 
     B/A &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma A      
     \\
     \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\phi_A}}
     && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\phi_B}} 
     && 
     && 
     \\
     A' &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& B' &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& B'/A' &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma A'           
    }
  $$

  where the top and bottom are distinguished triangles, then there exists a morphism $B/A \to B'/A'$ such as to make the completed diagram commute
  
  $$
    \array{    
     A &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& B &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& B/A &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma A      
     \\
     \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\phi_A}}
     && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\phi_B}} 
     && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\exists}}
     && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\Sigma \phi_A}}
     \\
     A' &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& B' &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& B'/A' &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma A'           
    }
  $$

* **T4** For every pair of composable morphisms $f \colon A \to B$ and $f' \colon B \to D$ then there is a [[commutative diagram]] of the form
  
  $$
    \array{
      A 
        &\overset{f}{\longrightarrow}& 
      B 
        &\overset{g}{\longrightarrow}& 
      C 
        &\overset{h}{\longrightarrow}&
      \Sigma A
      \\
      {}^{\mathllap{=}}\downarrow && {}^{\mathllap{f'}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{x}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{=}}
      \\
      A 
        &\underset{f' \circ f}{\longrightarrow}&
      B
        &\underset{g''}{\longrightarrow}&
      E
        &\underset{h''}{\longrightarrow}&
      \Sigma A
      \\
      && {}^{\mathllap{g'}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{y}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\Sigma f}}
      \\
      && 
      F 
       &\underset{=}{\longrightarrow}& 
      F
        &\underset{h'}{\longrightarrow}& 
      \Sigma B
      \\
      && {}^{\mathllap{h'}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{(\Sigma g)\circ h'}}
      \\
      && \Sigma B &\underset{\Sigma g}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma C
    }
  $$

  such that the two top horizontal sequences and the two middle vertical sequences each are distinguished triangles.

=--



+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The [[stable homotopy category]] $Ho(Spectra)$ from def. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategory}, equipped with the canonical suspension functor $\Sigma \colon Ho(Spectra) \overset{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} Ho(Spectra)$ (according to [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LoopingAsFunctorOnHomotopyCategory)) is a [[triangulated category]] (def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences}) for the distinguished triangles being precisely the images (under localization $SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable} \to Ho(Spectra)$ ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#UniversalPropertyOfHomotopyCategoryOfAModelCategory)) of the stable model category of theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentialSpectraIsModelCategory})
of the canonical long [[homotopy cofiber sequences]] ([prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LongFiberSequence)) 

$$
  A \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} B 
  \overset{}{\longrightarrow} hocofib(f)
  \longrightarrow
  \Sigma A
  \,.
$$


=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By prop. \ref{TheStableHomotopyCategoryIsAdditive} the stable homotopy category is additive, by theorem \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentiaSpectraIsStableModelCategory} the functor $\Sigma$ is an equivalence.

The axioms T0 and T1 are immediate from the definition of homotopy cofiber sequences. 

The axiom T2 is the very characterization of long homotopy cofiber sequences (from [this prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#LongFiberSequence)).

Regarding axiom T3:

By the factorization axioms of the [[model category]] we may represent the morphisms $A \to A'$ and $B \to B'$ in the homotopy category by cofibrations in the model category. Then $B \to B/A$ and $B' \to B'/A'$ are represented by their ordinary [[cofibers]] ([def.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#HomotopyFiber), [prop.](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#HomotopyFiberIndependentOfChoiceOfFibrantReplacement)). This way the morphism $B/A \to B'/A'$ is induced by the  [[universal property]] of ordinary cofibers.  To see that we may also complete the last vertical morphism, observe that generally these [[connecting homomorphisms]] may be represented functorially: 

By the existence of [[CW-approximations]] (prop. \ref{CWApproximationForSequentialSpectra}) we may assume without restriction of generality that all spectra involved are [[CW-spectra]]. For these the standard [[cylinder spectrum]] (example \ref{StandardCylinderSpectrumSequential}) is a good [[cylinder object]] (by prop. \ref{CylinderSpectrumOverCWSpectrumIsGood}), which hence provides a functorial construction $X \maspto X \wedge (I_+)$ of cylinder objects for CW-spectra. Then constructing the connecting homomorphism uniformly by first constructing cofibration replacements via the [[factorization lemma]] ([prop](Introduction+to+Stable+homotopy+theory+--+P#FactorizationLemma)), with respect to these cylinder objects, and then forming cofibers, is functorial, because all three ingredients are (cylinders, replacement, cofibers). 

With this again the universal property of the ordinary cofiber gives the fourth vertical morphism needed for T3.

Axiom T4 follows in the same fashion: we may represent all spectra by CW-spectra and represent $f$ and $f'$ by cofibrations. Then the diagram in question exists and commutes by functoriality of the connecting homomorphisms and by the universal properties of cofibers as above.

=--

#### Long fiber/cofiber sequences
 {#LongFiberCofiberSequences}

+-- {: .num_lemma #CompositesInADistinguishedTriangleAreZero}
###### Lemma

For $(Ho,\Sigma, CofSeq)$ a [[triangulated category]], def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences}, and 

$$
  A \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} B \overset{g}{\longrightarrow} B/A \overset{h}{\longrightarrow} \Sigma A
$$

a distinguished triangle, then 

$$
  g\circ f = 0
$$

is the [[zero morphism]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Consider the [[commuting diagram]]

$$
  \array{
    A 
      &\overset{id}{\longrightarrow}& 
    A 
      &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    0
      &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    \Sigma A
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f}}
    \\
    A 
      &\overset{f}{\longrightarrow}& 
    B 
      &\overset{g}{\longrightarrow}& 
    B/A 
      &\overset{h}{\longrightarrow}& 
    \Sigma A    
  }
  \,.
$$

Observe that the top part is a distinguished triangle by axioms T1 and T2 in def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences}. Hence by T3 there is an extension to 
a commuting diagram of the form

$$
  \array{
    A 
      &\overset{id}{\longrightarrow}& 
    A 
      &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    0
      &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    \Sigma A
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{id}} && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{f}}
    && \downarrow
    && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\Sigma f}}
    \\
    A 
      &\overset{f}{\longrightarrow}& 
    B 
      &\overset{g}{\longrightarrow}& 
    B/A 
      &\overset{h}{\longrightarrow}& 
    \Sigma A    
  }
  \,.
$$

Now the commutativity of the middle square proves the claim.

=--



+-- {: .num_prop #FiberCofiberSequencesInATriangulatedCategory}
###### Proposition

Let $(Ho,\Sigma, CofSeq)$ be a [[triangulated category]], def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences}, with [[hom-functor]] denoted by $[-,-]_\ast \colon Ho^{op}\times Ho \to Ab$. For $X\in Ho$ any object, and for $D\in CofSeq$ any distinguished triangle

$$
  D = (A \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} B \overset{g}{\longrightarrow} B/A \overset{h}{\longrightarrow} \Sigma A)
$$

then the sequences of [[abelian groups]]

1. (long cofiber sequence) 
    
   $$
    [\Sigma A, X]_\ast
      \overset{[h,X]_\ast}{\longrightarrow}
    [B/A,X]_\ast
      \overset{[g,X]_\ast}{\longrightarrow}
    [B,X]_\ast
      \overset{[f,X]_\ast}{\longrightarrow}
    [A,X]_\ast
   $$

1. (long fiber sequence)

   $$
     [X,A]_\ast
       \overset{[X,f]_\ast}{\longrightarrow}
     [X,B]_\ast
       \overset{[X,g]_\ast}{\longrightarrow}
     [X,B/A]_\ast
       \overset{[X,h]_\ast}{\longrightarrow}
     [X,\Sigma A]_\ast 
   $$

are [[long exact sequences]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Regarding the first case:

Since $g \circ f = 0$ by lemma \ref{CompositesInADistinguishedTriangleAreZero}, we have an inclusion $im([g,X]_\ast) \subset ker([f,X]_\ast)$. Hence it is sufficient to show that if $\psi \colon B \to X$ is in the kernel of $[f,X]_\ast$ in that $\psi \circ f = 0$, then there is $\phi \colon C \to X$ with $\phi \circ g = \psi$. To that end, consider the commuting diagram

$$
  \array{
    A 
      &\overset{f}{\longrightarrow}& 
    B 
      &\overset{g}{\longrightarrow}& 
    B/A 
      &\overset{h}{\longrightarrow}& 
    \Sigma A
    \\
    \downarrow && {}^{\mathllap{\psi}}\downarrow
    \\
    0 
      &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    X
      &\overset{id}{\longrightarrow}&
    X
      &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    0
  }
  \,,
$$

where the commutativity of the left square exhibits our assumption.

The top part of this diagram is a distinguished triangle by assumption, and the bottom part is by condition $T1$ in def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences}. Hence by condition T3 there exists $\phi$ fitting into a commuting diagram of the form

$$
  \array{
    A 
      &\overset{f}{\longrightarrow}& 
    B 
      &\overset{g}{\longrightarrow}& 
    B/A 
      &\overset{h}{\longrightarrow}& 
    \Sigma A
    \\
    \downarrow && {}^{\mathllap{\psi}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\phi}} && \downarrow
    \\
    0 
      &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    X
      &\overset{id}{\longrightarrow}&
    X
      &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}&
    0
  }
  \,.
$$

Here the commutativity of the middle square exhibits the desired conclusion.

This shows that the first sequence in question is exact at $[B,X]_\ast$. Applying the same reasoning to the distinguished traingle $(g,h,-\Sigma f)$ provided by T2 yields exactness at $[C,X]_\ast$.

Regarding the second case: 

Again, from lemma \ref{CompositesInADistinguishedTriangleAreZero} it is immediate that 

$$
  im([X,f]_\ast) \subset ker([X,g]_\ast)
$$

so that we need to show that for $\psi \colon X \to B$ in the kernel of $[X,g]_\ast$, hence such that $g\circ \psi = 0$, then there exists $\phi \colon X \to A$ with $f \circ \phi = \psi$.

To that end, consider the commuting diagram

$$
  \array{
    X &\longrightarrow& 0 &\longrightarrow& \Sigma X &\overset{- id}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma X
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\psi}} && \downarrow
    \\
     B 
       &\overset{g}{\longrightarrow}&
     B/A
       &\overset{h}{\longrightarrow}&
     \Sigma A
       &\overset{-\Sigma f}{\longrightarrow}&
     \Sigma B
  }
  \,,
$$

where the commutativity of the left square exhibits our assumption.

Now the top part of this diagram is a distinguished triangle by conditions T1 and T2 in def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences}, while the bottom part is a distinguished triangle by applying T2 to the given distinguished triangle. Hence by T3 there exists $\tilde \phi \colon \Sigma X \to \Sigma A$ such as to extend to a commuting diagram of the form

$$
  \array{
    X &\longrightarrow& 0 &\longrightarrow& \Sigma X &\overset{- id}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma X
    \\
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\psi}} 
      && 
    \downarrow
      &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\tilde \phi}}
      &&
    \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\Sigma \psi}}
    \\
     B 
       &\overset{g}{\longrightarrow}&
     B/A
       &\overset{h}{\longrightarrow}&
     \Sigma A
       &\overset{-\Sigma f}{\longrightarrow}&
     \Sigma B
  }
  \,,
$$

At this point we appeal to the condition in def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences} that $\Sigma \colon Ho \to Ho$ is an [[equivalence of categories]], so that in particular it is a [[fully faithful functor]]. It being a [[full functor]] implies that there exists $\phi \colon X \to A$ with $\tilde \phi = \Sigma \phi$. It being faithful then implies that the whole commuting square on the right is the image under $\Sigma$ of a commuting square

$$
  \array{
    X &\overset{-id}{\longrightarrow}& X
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\phi}}\downarrow && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\psi}}
    \\
    A &\underset{-f}{\longrightarrow}& B
  }
  \,.
$$

This exhibits the claim to be shown.

=--

+-- {: .num_lemma #TwoOutOfThreeForMorphismsOfDistinguishedTriangles}
###### Lemma

Consider a morphism of distinguished triangles in a triangulated category (def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences}):

$$
  \array{    
   A &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& B &\overset{g}{\longrightarrow}& B/A &\overset{h}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma A      
   \\
   \downarrow^{\mathrlap{a}} 
   && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{b}} 
   && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{c}}
   && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{\Sigma a}}
   \\
   A' &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& B' &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& B'/A' &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& \Sigma A'          
   }
 \,.
$$

If two out of $\{a,b,c\}$ are isomorphisms, then so is the third.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Consider the image of the situation under the hom-functor $[X,-]_\ast$ out of any object $X$:

$$
  \array{    
   [X,A]_\ast &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& [X,B]_\ast &\overset{g}{\longrightarrow}& [X,B/A]_\ast &\overset{h}{\longrightarrow}& [X,\Sigma A]_\ast &\longrightarrow& [X,\Sigma B]_\ast
   \\
   \downarrow^{\mathrlap{a_\ast}} 
   && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{b_\ast}} 
   && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{c_\ast}}
   && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{(\Sigma a)_\ast }}
   && \downarrow^{\mathrlap{(\Sigma b)_\ast }}
   \\
   [X,A']_\ast &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& [X,B']_\ast &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& [X,B'/A']_\ast &\overset{}{\longrightarrow}& [X,\Sigma A']_\ast &\longrightarrow& [X,\Sigma B']_\ast           
   }
 \,,
$$

where we extended one step to the right using axiom T2 (def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences}).

By prop. \ref{FiberCofiberSequencesInATriangulatedCategory} here the top and bottom are [[exact sequences]].

So assume the case that $a$ and $b$ are isomorphisms, hence that $a_\ast$, $b_\ast$, $(\Sigma a)_\ast$ and $(\Sigma b)_\ast$ are isomorphisms. Then by exactness of the horizontal sequences the [[five lemma]] implies that $c_\ast$ is an isomorphism. Since this holds [[natural transformation|naturally]] for all $X$, the [[Yoneda lemma]] then implies that $c$ is an isomorphism.

If instead $b$ and $c$ are isomorphisms, apply this same argument to the triple $(b,c,\Sigma a)$ to conclude that $\Sigma a$ is an isomorphism. Since $\Sigma$ is an [[equivalence of categories]], this implies then that $a$ is an isomorphism.

Analogously for the third case.

=--

+-- {: .num_lemma #TwoOutOfThreeForMorphismsOfDistinguishedTriangles}
###### Lemma

If $(g,h,-\Sigma f)$ is a distinguished triangle in a triangulated category (def. \ref{CategoryWithCofiberSequences}), then so is $(f,g,h)$.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By T0 there is some distinguished triangle of the form $(f,g',h')$. By T2 this gives a distinguished triangle $(-\Sigma f, -\Sigma g', -\Sigma h')$. By T3 there is a morphism $c'$ giving a commuting diagram

$$
  \array{
    \Sigma A 
      &\overset{-\Sigma f}{\longrightarrow}&
    \Sigma B
      &\overset{-\Sigma g}{\longrightarrow}&
    \Sigma C
      &\overset{-\Sigma h}{\longrightarrow}&    
    \Sigma^2 A
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{=}}\downarrow
    &&
    {}^{\mathllap{=}}\downarrow
    &&
    {}^{\mathllap{c'}}\downarrow
    &&
    {}^{\mathllap{=}}\downarrow
    \\
    \Sigma A 
      &\overset{-\Sigma f}{\longrightarrow}&
    \Sigma B
      &\overset{-\Sigma g'}{\longrightarrow}&
    \Sigma C
      &\overset{-\Sigma h'}{\longrightarrow}&    
    \Sigma^2 A
  }
  \,.
$$

Now lemma \ref{TwoOutOfThreeForMorphismsOfDistinguishedTriangles} gives that $c'$ is an isomorphism. Since $\Sigma$ is an [[equivalence of categories]], there is an isomorphism $c$ such that $c' = \Sigma c$. This $c$ exhibits an isomorphism between $(f,g,h)$ and $(f,g',h')$. Since the latter is distinguished, so is the former, by T0.

=--

In conclusion, this says that in the stable homotopy category homotopy (co-)fiber sequences run indefinitely in both directions. In particular for $[\mathbb{S},-]_\ast$, the [[long exact sequences of homotopy groups]] do.

### Relation to sequential spectra in $sSet$ and to combinatorial spectra

+-- {: .num_prop #QuillenEquivalenceToStableBFModelStructure}
###### Proposition

The [[Quillen equivalence]] $({\vert - \vert} \dashv Sing)$ between the [[classical model structure on topological spaces]] and the [[classical model structure on simplicial sets]] prolongs to a [[Quillen equivalence]] 

$$
  SeqSpec(Top_{cg})_{stable}
    \underoverset
      {\underset{Sing}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\overset{\vert - \vert}{\longleftarrow}}
      {\simeq_{\mathrlap{Q}}}
  SeqSpec(sSet)_{stable}
$$

betwen the stable model structure on topological spectra from theorm \ref{StableModelStructureOnSequentialSpectraIsModelCategory}, and the stable [[Bousfield-Friedlander model structure]].

Moreover there is a [[Quillen equivalences]] with a model structure on [[Daniel Kan]]'s [[combinatorial spectra]].

=--

([Bousfield-Friedlander 78, section 2.5](#BousfieldFriedlander78)).


### Relation to structure spectra and excisive functors
 {#RelationToExcisiveFunctors}

... _[[Model categories of diagram spectra]]_...


## References

* {#BousfieldFriedlander78} [[Aldridge Bousfield]], [[Eric Friedlander]], _Homotopy theory of $\Gamma$-spaces, spectra, and bisimplicial sets_, Springer Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 658, Springer, Berlin, 1978, pp. 80-130. ([pdf](https://www.math.rochester.edu/people/faculty/doug/otherpapers/bousfield-friedlander.pdf))

* {#GoerssJardine96} [[Paul Goerss]], [[Rick Jardine]], section X.4 of _[[Simplicial homotopy theory]]_, (1996)

* {#Schwede97} [[Stefan Schwede]], _Spectra in model categories and applications to the algebraic cotangent complex_, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 120 (1997) 77-104 ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/schwede/modelspec.pdf))

* {#Bousfield01} [[Aldridge Bousfield]], section 9 of _On the telescopic homotopy theory of spaces_, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 353 (2001), no. 6, 23912426 ([AMS](http://www.ams.org/journals/tran/2001-353-06/S0002-9947-00-02649-0/), [jstor](http://www.jstor.org/stable/221952))


* {#MMSS00} [[Michael Mandell]], [[Peter May]], [[Stefan Schwede]], [[Brooke Shipley]], _[[Model categories of diagram spectra]]_, Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 82 (2001), 441-512 ([pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/PAPERS/mmssLMSDec30.pdf))

[[!redirects Bousfield-Friedlander model category]] 

[[!redirects Bousfield-Friedlander model structures]]
