Mathematicians are often guided by their sense of beauty.  Beauty is a key to the [[big picture]] in [[mathematics]] as well as [[physics]] and [[philosophy]].

### Questions about beauty ###

* What is meant by beauty? 
* What principles determine it? 
* To what extent is beauty objective and subjective?
* How does beauty lead to mathematical insight?

### Investigation: Collect examples###

In this section, we collect examples of beauty in mathematics. 

Richard Stanley's post at Math Overflow, [Most intricate and most beautiful structures in mathematics](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/49151/most-intricate-and-most-beautiful-structures-in-mathematics), produced the following list, ordered by votes received:

1. The absolute Galois group of the rationals
1. The natural numbers (and variations)
1. Homotopy groups of spheres
1. The Mandelbrot set
1. The Littlewood Richardson coefficients (representations of Sn etc.)
1. The class of ordinals
1. The monster vertex algebra
1. Classical Hopf fibration
1. Exotic Lie groups (See the Scientific American article about A.Garrett Lisi's application of E8 to physics: [A Geometric Theory of Everything](http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/A_Geometric_Theory_of_Everything.pdf))
1. The Cantor set
1. The 24 dimensional packing of unit spheres with kissing number 196560 (related to the monster vertex algebra).
1. The simplicial symmetric sphere spectrum
1. F_un (whatever it is)
1. The Grothendiek-Teichmuller tower.
1. Riemann's zeta function
1. Schwartz space of functions


Below we gather more examples, both basic and advanced:

* e^2pi*i + 1 = 0  
* more generally, Euler's formula: e^2pi*ix = cos(x) + i sin(x)
* the unique decomposition of natural numbers into prime numbers
* Euler's polyhedron formula V - E + F = 2 
* the classification of the Platonic solids
* the relationship between a polynomial and its graph


### Investigation: Analyze examples###

In this section, we analyze the examples collected above to consider: 

* In what sense are they beautiful?
* What makes them beautiful?
* What are the simplest examples of beauty?
* Which examples yield the most beauty for the least drudgery?


### Investigation: Look for unifying principles or contexts. ###

Urs Schreiber [notes](http://mathoverflow.net/a/166025/381) that many of the beautiful structures relate to [[string theory]].

