pages/17385.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Philosophy
+--{: .hide}
[[!include philosophy - contents]]
=--
#### Foundations
+--{: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

>$\mu\alpha\theta\eta\sigma\iota\varsigma$ - Learning (Gr.)

This page will discuss approaches to **teaching of mathematics** (as it is usual in the subject, with emphasis on the pre-university level, where the care in didactical aspects is the most relevant) and
the outstanding sources of the relevant materials.

## Software 

* [geogebra.org](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoGebra), wikipedia: [geogebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoGebra)

## Thematical Links
* wikipedia: [mathematics education](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematics_education), [Common Core State Standards Initiative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Core_State_Standards_Initiative), [New Math](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Math), [Moore method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore_method)
* [NCTM](http://www.nctm.org) National Organization of Teachers of Mathematics
* [Common Core](http://www.corestandards.org/Math) math standards
* Liping Ma, _Knowing and Teaching Elementary Mathematics: Teachers' Understanding of Fundamental Mathematics in China and the United States_ (Studies in Mathematical Thinking and Learning Series)
   * Liping Ma, _A critique of the structure of U.S. elementary school mathematics_, Notices AMS, Oct 2013 [pdf](http://www.ams.org/notices/201310/fea-ma.pdf)
   * Liping Ma, [webpage](http://lipingma.net/math/math.html)
   * blog opinion [What Does Liping Ma REALLY say?](http://rationalmathed.blogspot.hr/2007/06/what-does-liping-ma-really-say.html)
* Elizabeth Green, [Why Do Americans Stink at Math?](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/27/magazine/why-do-americans-stink-at-math.html), New York Times opinion story (moral: good ideas in the reforms never materialized in practice)
* [Guy Brousseau](http://www.ardm.eu/contenu/guy-brousseau-english) and at French [wikipedia](https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guy_Brousseau)

## Related $n$Lab pages

* [[New Math]]

* [[Practical Foundations of Mathematics]]

## References

* [[Felix Klein]], _Elementary mathematics from an advanced standpoint_

The following texts contain useful material for teaching **elementary geometry** at an intermediate high-school and undergraduate level:

* Robin Hartshorne, _Teaching geometry according to Euclid_ , Notices AMS __47__:4 (2000) 460-465 [pdf](http://www.ams.org/notices/200004/fea-hartshorne.pdf)

* Robin Hartshorne, _Geometry - Euclid and Beyond_ , UTM Springer 2000.

* [[David Hilbert]], Stephan Cohn-Vossen, _Anschauliche Geometrie_ , Springer Berlin 1932. ([gdz](http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/toc/?PID=PPN379425343))

* David Henderson, Daina Taimina, _Experiencing Geometry_ , Prentice-Hall Upper Saddle River 2005. (Supplementary online material: [link](http://www.math.cornell.edu/~henderson/ExpGeom/ExpGeomSuppl.html))

* John Stillwell, _The Four Pillars of Geometry_ , UTM Springer 2005.

The following very accurate books were intended to teach geometry to high school teachers of mathematics:

* Jacquelline Lelong-Ferrand, _Les fondements de la géométrie_, Presses Universitaires de France, 1985
* [[Jean Dieudonné]], _Linear algebra and geometry_

The following book is a unique attempt by two prominent mathematicians to give an elementary introduction to [[category theory]] directed at beginning students and general readers which is relevant to school education as well:

* [[F. William Lawvere]], [[Stephen H. Schanuel]], _Conceptual Mathematics: A First Introduction to Categories_ , Cambridge UP 1997.



category: education

Commit message:

Revision ID: 108090 Revision date: 2016-04-28 09:42:50 Page name: mathematics education Author: Zoran Škoda IP address: 161.53.28.4

pages/17385.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Philosophy
+--{: .hide}
[[!include philosophy - contents]]
=--
#### Foundations
+--{: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

>$\mu\alpha\theta\eta\sigma\iota\varsigma$ - Learning (Gr.)

This page will discuss approaches to **teaching of mathematics** (as it is usual in the subject, with emphasis on the pre-university level, where the care in didactical aspects is the most relevant) and
the outstanding sources of the relevant materials about teaching.

Pedagogically well written introductory books in mathematics, rather than about pedagogical matter, are also of our concern, but will be posted under 
[[elementary mathematics]], [[introductions to mathematics]], [[elementary geometry]] and related pages.

## Software 

* [geogebra.org](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoGebra), wikipedia: [geogebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoGebra)

## Thematical Links
* wikipedia: [mathematics education](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematics_education), [Common Core State Standards Initiative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Core_State_Standards_Initiative), [New Math](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Math), [Moore method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore_method)
* [NCTM](http://www.nctm.org) National Organization of Teachers of Mathematics
* [Common Core](http://www.corestandards.org/Math) math standards
* Liping Ma, _Knowing and Teaching Elementary Mathematics: Teachers' Understanding of Fundamental Mathematics in China and the United States_ (Studies in Mathematical Thinking and Learning Series)
   * Liping Ma, _A critique of the structure of U.S. elementary school mathematics_, Notices AMS, Oct 2013 [pdf](http://www.ams.org/notices/201310/fea-ma.pdf)
   * Liping Ma, [webpage](http://lipingma.net/math/math.html)
   * blog opinion [What Does Liping Ma REALLY say?](http://rationalmathed.blogspot.hr/2007/06/what-does-liping-ma-really-say.html)
* Elizabeth Green, [Why Do Americans Stink at Math?](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/27/magazine/why-do-americans-stink-at-math.html), New York Times opinion story (moral: good ideas in the reforms never materialized in practice)
* [Guy Brousseau](http://www.ardm.eu/contenu/guy-brousseau-english) and at French [wikipedia](https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guy_Brousseau)

## Related $n$Lab pages

* [[New Math]]

* [[Practical Foundations of Mathematics]]

## References

* [[Felix Klein]], _Elementary mathematics from an advanced standpoint_

The following texts contain useful material for teaching **elementary geometry** at an intermediate high-school and undergraduate level:

* Robin Hartshorne, _Teaching geometry according to Euclid_ , Notices AMS __47__:4 (2000) 460-465 [pdf](http://www.ams.org/notices/200004/fea-hartshorne.pdf)

* Robin Hartshorne, _Geometry - Euclid and Beyond_ , UTM Springer 2000.

* [[David Hilbert]], Stephan Cohn-Vossen, _Anschauliche Geometrie_ , Springer Berlin 1932. ([gdz](http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/toc/?PID=PPN379425343))

* David Henderson, Daina Taimina, _Experiencing Geometry_ , Prentice-Hall Upper Saddle River 2005. (Supplementary online material: [link](http://www.math.cornell.edu/~henderson/ExpGeom/ExpGeomSuppl.html))

* John Stillwell, _The Four Pillars of Geometry_ , UTM Springer 2005.

The following very accurate books were intended to teach geometry to high school teachers of mathematics:

* Jacquelline Lelong-Ferrand, _Les fondements de la géométrie_, Presses Universitaires de France, 1985
* [[Jean Dieudonné]], _Linear algebra and geometry_

The following book is a unique attempt by two prominent mathematicians to give an elementary introduction to [[category theory]] directed at beginning students and general readers which is relevant to school education as well:

* [[F. William Lawvere]], [[Stephen H. Schanuel]], _Conceptual Mathematics: A First Introduction to Categories_ , Cambridge UP 1997.



category: education
