# The Quintet Construction

* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A *quintet construction* is an operation that takes a "globular" categorical structure and produces a "cubical" one (see [[geometric shape for higher structures]]) in which the squares

$$ \array{ A & \overset{f}{\to} & B \\
^g\downarrow  & \swArrow & \downarrow^h\\
C & \underset{k}{\to} & D }$$

are morphisms between composites $\alpha:h\circ f \to k\circ g$.  The name arises because a square in the resulting cubical structure is formally a quintet $(f,g,h,k,\alpha)$ (since just knowing the globular cell $\alpha$ does not determine the decomposition of its domain and codomain as composites).


## Examples

* Quintets in a [[strict 2-category]] form a [[strict double category]].

* Quintets in a [[bicategory]] form a [[double bicategory]].

* Quintets in a [[Gray-category]] form an [[intercategory]].


## Applications

A quintet construction is at least morally a [[left adjoint]] to a functor that picks out the [[companion pairs]] in a cubical structure.  Thus, functors *out* of quintet constructions are nothing new; but some interesting applications involve functors *into* quintet constructions from other cubical structures.  For instance:

* The assignment of [[homotopy categories]] and [[derived functors]] to [[model categories]] can be made into a [[double pseudofunctor]] from the [[double category of model categories]] to the double category of quintets in [[Cat]].  This implies that [[mates]] are preserved even when they relate composites of left and right [[Quillen functors]].

## References

The concept originates in 

* {#BastianeEhresmann74} A. Bastiani, [[Charles Ehresmann]], pages 272-273 of  _Multiple functors. I. Limits relative to double categories_, Cah. Top. Géom. Différ. Catég. 15 (1974) 215–292

[[!redirects quintet]]
[[!redirects quintets]]
[[!redirects quintet constructions]]
[[!redirects quintets in a 2-category]]
[[!redirects double category of quintets]]
