# Relevance logics

* table of contents
{:toc}

##Idea

**Relevance logics**, also known as **relevant logics**, are non-classical logics designed to avoid what some consider to be paradoxical about classical [[implication]].  In particular, certain hypothetical propositions in which antecedent and consequent are irrelevant to one another occur as [[tautologies]] in [[classical logic]], whereas one might consider that a claim that '$P$ implies $Q$' suggests that the truth of $P$ gives us reason to accept the truth of $Q$.

## As a substructural logic

Some relevance logics can, at least roughly, be regarded as a [[substructural logic]] like [[linear logic]] in which the [[contraction rule]] is permitted but not the [[weakening rule]].  Thus in a sense they are the "dual" of [[affine logic]] which permits weakening but not contraction.

Although one could simply add contraction to linear logic, many relevance logics have additional features that this would not capture.  One notable one is that the [[additive conjunction]] still [[distributive lattice|distributes]] over the [[additive disjunction]]:
$$ A \wedge (B\vee C) \leftrightarrow (A\wedge B) \vee (A\wedge C) $$
although this is not true in linear logic, and simply adding contraction does not make it true.  It can of course be added as an [[axiom]], but it is often better to give a modified [[sequent calculus]] that makes it true automatically, by using [[bunches]].  One such sequent calculus can be found in ([Mints](#Mints)).

## Categorical semantics

Just as linear logic (with the [[exchange rule]], but not contraction or weakening) has semantics in [[symmetric monoidal categories]], and ordinary logic has semantics in [[cartesian monoidal categories]] (both perhaps with extra structure, such as being [[closed monoidal category|closed]] or [[star-autonomous category|star-autonomous]]), affine logic has semantics in [[semicartesian monoidal categories]] while relevance logics have semantics in [[relevance monoidal categories]].

##Related concepts

* [[linear logic]]
* [[bunched logic]]
* Some relevance logics are also [[paraconsistent logic|paraconsistent]].

##References

* [Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-relevance/)

* G. E. Mints. Cut-elimination theorem for relevant logics, Zap. Nauchn. Sem. LOMI, 1972,	Volume 32, Pages 90–97. ([math-net.ru](http://www.mathnet.ru/php/archive.phtml?wshow=paper&jrnid=znsl&paperid=2569&option_lang=eng)).
An English translation appears in the Journal of Soviet Mathematics 6 (1976) pp.422-8. ([doi](http://doi.org/10.1007/BF01084083))
 {#Mints}

* Peter W. O'Hearn and David J. Pym. The Logic of Bunched Implications. _Bulletin of Symbolic Logic_ 5(2):215-244. ([pdf](http://www.lsv.ens-cachan.fr/~demri/OHearnPym99.pdf)) ([doi](https://dx.doi.org/10.2307%2F421090))

[[!redirects relevance logics]]
[[!redirects relevant logic]]
[[!redirects relevant logics]]
