# Bunched logic

* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[logic]], and more specifically in [[sequent calculus]]/[[natural deduction]], a **bunched logic** is a logic in which the formulas in the [[context]] are not just a [[list]] or [[set]] but have some additional, usually [[tree]]-like, structure.

This can be indicated syntactically by the use of two or more punctuation symbols, such as comma and semicolon, along with parentheses for grouping.  Thus for instance a sequent with bunches might be written like

$$ A,B,(C;(D,E);F),(G;H) \vdash K $$

The sub-contexts surrounded by parentheses are informally called *bunches*.  The phrase *bunched logic* is not entirely standard, although the word "bunches" has been used for multiple logics of this form.

Each type of punctuation also comes with a nullary version.  The punctuation symbols like comma and semicolon are sometimes called *structural connectives*, since they are part of the judgmental structure (like [[structural rules]]) but are closely related to the [[logical connectives]] such as conjunction and disjunction.

Usually the reason for using a bunched logic is that the bunches of different sorts obey different [[structural rules]].  For instance, the semicolon-bunches might allow the [[contraction rule]] and/or the [[weakening rule]], while the comma-bunches do not.

## Examples

### Bunched implications

In **bunched implications** logic ([BI](#BI)), the semicolon-bunches allow contraction and weakening while the comma-bunches do not.  This allows defining both an [[additive conjunction]] and a [[multiplicative conjunction]], internalizing the semicolon and the comma respectively, such that both [[distributive law|distribute]] over the [[additive disjunction]] and moreover both come with a corresponding implication: the [[additive implication]] and the [[multiplicative implication]].

### Relevance logic

Some forms of [[relevance logic]] can be presented with a bunched sequent calculus that is similar to BI, but in which the comma-bunches also have contraction (though not weakening) and there is no additive implication.  See for instance ([Mints](#Mints)).

## Categorical semantics

Bunched logics naturally have semantics in categories with more than one [[monoidal structure]], so that a bunch such as $(A,(B;C),((D,E);F))$ can be interpreted as $A \otimes (B\boxtimes C) \otimes ((D\otimes E)\boxtimes F)$.  Frequently (e.g. if one kind of bunch admits contraction and weakening) one of the two monoidal structures is a [[cartesian monoidal category|cartesian]] one.  A typical and motivating example of a model for BI is the [[category of presheaves]] $[C^{op},Set]$ over a monoidal category $C$, which comes equipped both with the ordinary [[ccc structure on presheaves]] as well as the closed monoidal structure given by [[Day convolution]].

## Related pages

* [[linear logic]]
* [[relevance logic]]
* [[separation logic]]
* [[display logic]]
* [[substructural logic]]

## References

* Peter W. O'Hearn and David J. Pym, *The Logic of Bunched Implications*.  [PDF](http://www.lsv.ens-cachan.fr/~demri/OHearnPym99.pdf)
 {#BI}

* G. E. Mints. *Cut-elimination theorem for relevant logics*, Zap. Nauchn. Sem. LOMI, 1972,	Volume 32, Pages 90–97. ([math-net.ru](http://www.mathnet.ru/php/archive.phtml?wshow=paper&jrnid=znsl&paperid=2569&option_lang=eng)).
An English translation appears in the Journal of Soviet Mathematics 6 (1976) pp.422-8. ([doi](http://doi.org/10.1007/BF01084083))
 {#Mints}

* Bodil Biering, *On the logic of bunched implications - and its relation to separation logic*, [masters thesis](http://www.itu.dk/people/biering/papers/speciale.ps)

* David Pym, *The Semantics and Proof Theory of the Logic of Bunched Implications*, [Google books](https://books.google.com/books/about/The_Semantics_and_Proof_Theory_of_the_Lo.html?id=0bAfqhzDuOcC&redir_esc=y)

* Brotherston and Calcagno, *Classical BI: Its Semantics and Proof Theory*, [arxiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/1005.2340)

[[!redirects bunched logics]]
[[!redirects bunch]]
[[!redirects bunches]]
[[!redirects bunched implication]]
[[!redirects bunched implications]]
[[!redirects BI]]
[[!redirects structural connective]]
[[!redirects structural connectives]]
