+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}

### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

##Idea
A **scattered topos** is the topos-theoretic analogue of a [[scattered space|scattered topological space]] and therefore provides a natural environment for an internal interpretation of [[provability logic]].

##Definition
A topos $\mathcal{E}$ is called $\bot\negthinspace$-scattered if the subtopos $Sh_{\neg\neg}(\mathcal{E})$ of [[double negation|double negation sheaves]] is an [[open subtopos]].

A topos $\mathcal{E}$ is called _scattered_ if every [[closed subtopos]] of $\mathcal{E}$ is $\bot$-scattered.

##Examples

Every [[Boolean topos]] $\mathcal{E}$ is $\bot$-scattered since it obviously coincides with $Sh_{\neg\neg}(\mathcal{E})$ and is [[open subtopos|open]] in itself (and [[closed subtopos|closed]] as well). Accordingly, $\mathcal{E}$ is scattered since subtoposes of Boolean toposes are Boolean.

A simple example of a non-Boolean scattered topos is the [[Sierpinski topos]] $Set^\rightarrow$ that consists of two copies of $Set$ [[Artin gluing|glued]] together such that one copy corresponding to $Sh_{\neg\neg}(Set^\rightarrow)$ is open and the other one is closed. Since $Set^\rightarrow$ and the closed copy of $Set$ are both $\bot$-scattered the claim follows.

##Properties

* That the Sierpinski-topos is $\bot$-scattered is an instance of the more general fact that _the topos $Sh(X)$ of sheaves on a $T_0$-space $X$ is $\bot$-scattered_ iff _open points are dense in $X$_ .[^ref] 

[^ref]: cf. Esakia-Jibladze-Pataraia ([2000](#EJP00), p.101).

##Related entries

* [[scattered space]]

* [[provability logic]]

* [[double negation]]

* [[De Morgan topos]]

* [[locally closed subtopos]]

##References

The concept was introduced in

* {#EJP00} Leo Esakia, [[Mamuka Jibladze]], Dito Pataraia, _Scattered Toposes_ , APAL **103** (2000) pp.97-107.

For the wider context see also

* Leo Esakia, _Quantification with a provability smack_ , Bull. Sect. Log. **27**  (1998) pp.26-28. ([pdf](http://www.filozof.uni.lodz.pl/bulletin/pdf/27_12_6.pdf))