pages/17448.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}

### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

##Idea
A **scattered topos** is the topos-theoretic analogue of a [[scattered space|scattered topological space]] and therefore provides a natural environment for an internal interpretation of [[provability logic]].

##Definition
A topos $\mathcal{E}$ is called $\bot\negthinspace$-scattered if the subtopos $Sh_{\neg\neg}(\mathcal{E})$ of [[double negation|double negation sheaves]] is an [[open subtopos]].

A topos $\mathcal{E}$ is called _scattered_ if every [[closed subtopos]] of $\mathcal{E}$ is $\bot$-scattered.

##Example

....

##Properties

....

##Related entries

* [[scattered space]]

* [[provability logic]]

* [[double negation]]

* [[De Morgan topos]]

##References

* {#EJP00} Leo Esakia, [[Mamuka Jibladze]], Dito Pataraia, _Scattered Toposes_ , APAL **103** (2000) pp.97-107.

Commit message:

Revision ID: 108571 Revision date: 2016-05-11 07:37:42 Page name: scattered topos Author: Thomas Holder IP address: 176.0.101.180

pages/17448.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}

### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

##Idea
A **scattered topos** is the topos-theoretic analogue of a [[scattered space|scattered topological space]] and therefore provides a natural environment for an internal interpretation of [[provability logic]].

##Definition
A topos $\mathcal{E}$ is called $\bot\negthinspace$-scattered if the subtopos $Sh_{\neg\neg}(\mathcal{E})$ of [[double negation|double negation sheaves]] is an [[open subtopos]].

A topos $\mathcal{E}$ is called _scattered_ if every [[closed subtopos]] of $\mathcal{E}$ is $\bot$-scattered.

##Examples

Every [[Boolean topos]] $\mathcal{E}$ is $\bot$-scattered since it obviously coincides with $Sh_{\neg\neg}(\mathcal{E})$ and is [[open subtopos|open]] in itself (and [[closed subtopos|closed]] as well). Accordingly, $\mathcal{E}$ is scattered since subtoposes of Boolean toposes are Boolean.

A simple example of a non-Boolean scattered topos is the [[Sierpinski topos]] $Set^\rightarrow$ that consists of two copies of $Set$ [[Artin gluing|glued]] together such that one copy corresponding to $Sh_{\neg\neg}(Set^\rightarrow)$ is open and the other one is closed. Since $Set^\rightarrow$ and the closed copy of $Set$ are both $\bot$-scattered the claim follows.

##Properties

....

##Related entries

* [[scattered space]]

* [[provability logic]]

* [[double negation]]

* [[De Morgan topos]]

* [[locally closed subtopos]]

##References

* {#EJP00} Leo Esakia, [[Mamuka Jibladze]], Dito Pataraia, _Scattered Toposes_ , APAL **103** (2000) pp.97-107.
