
> This page is about homotopy as a transformation.  For homotopy sets in [[homotopy categories]], see [[homotopy (as an operation)]].

***


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents 
{:toc}

## Idea 

In many [[category|categories]] $C$ in which one does [[homotopy theory]], there is a notion of _homotopy_ between morphisms, which is closely related to the higher morphisms in [[higher category theory]].  If we regard such a category as a presentation of an $(\infty,1)$-[[(infinity,1)-category|category]], then homotopies $f\sim g$ present the 2-cells $f\Rightarrow g$ in the resulting $(\infty,1)$-category.


## Definition in enriched categories 

If $C$ is [[enriched category|enriched]] over [[Top]], then a **homotopy** in $C$ between maps $f,g:X\,\rightrightarrows \,Y$ is a map $H:[0,1] \to C(X,Y)$ in $Top$ such that $H(0)=f$ and $H(1)=g$.  In $Top$ itself this is the classical notion.

If $C$ has [[copower|copowers]], then an equivalent definition is a map $[0,1]\odot X\to Y$, while if it has [[power|powers]], an equivalent definition is a map $X\to \pitchfork([0,1],Y)$.

There is a similar definition in a [[simplicially enriched category]], replacing $[0,1]$ with the 1-simplex $\Delta^1$, with the caveat that in this case not all _simplicial homotopies_ need be composable even if they match correctly. (This depends on whether or not all (2,1)-[[horn]]s  in the simplicial set, $C(X,Y)$, have fillers.)   Likewise in a [[dg-category]] we can use the "chain complex interval" to get a notion of _chain homotopy_.


## Definition in model categories 

If $C$ is instead a [[model category]], it has an intrinsic notion of homotopy determined by its factorizations.

* A **[[path object]]** $Path(X)$ for an object $X$ is a factorization of the diagonal $X \to X \times X$ as
$$
  X \to Path(X) \to X \times X
  \,.
$$
where $X\to Path(X)$ is a weak equivalence.

* A **[[cylinder object]]** $Cyl(X)$ is a factorization of the codiagonal (or "fold") $X \sqcup X \to X$ as
$$
  X \sqcup X \to Cyl(X) \to X
  \,.
$$
where $Cyl(X) \to X$ is a weak equivalence.

Frequently one asks as well that $Path(X)\to X\times X$ be a fibration and $X\sqcup X\to Cyl(X)$ be a cofibration; we call such paths and cylinders _good_.  Clearly any object has a good path object and a good cylinder object.  However, in the usual [[model structure on topological spaces]], the obvious object $X\times I$ is a cylinder, but not a good cylinder unless $X$ itself is cofibrant.

We think of $Path(X)$ as an analogue of $\pitchfork(I,X)$ and $Cyl(X)$ as an analogue of $I\odot X$.  In fact, if $C$ is a $Top$-enriched model category and $X$ is cofibrant, then these powers and copowers  are in fact examples of path and cylinder objects.  (This works more  generally if $C$ is a $V$-model category and $e\sqcup e \to I \to e$ is a good cylinder object for the cofibrant unit object $e$ of $V$.)


Then:

* A **left homotopy** between two morphisms $f,g : X \to Y$ in $C$ is a morphism $\eta : Cyl(X) \to Y$ such that
$$
  \array{
    X &\rightarrow& Cyl(X) &\leftarrow& X
    \\
    & {}_f\searrow &\downarrow^\eta& \swarrow_g
    \\
    && 
    Y
  }
  \,.
$$

* A **right homotopy** between two morphisms $f,g : X \to Y$ in $C$ is a morphism $\eta : X \to Path(Y)$ such that
$$
  \array{
    && X
    \\
    & {}^f\swarrow & \downarrow^\eta & \searrow^{g} 
    \\
    Y &\leftarrow& Path(Y) &\rightarrow& Y
  }
  \,.
$$

By the above remarks about powers and copowers, it follows that in a $Top$-model category, any enriched homotopy between maps $X\to Y$ is a left homotopy if $X$ is cofibrant and a right homotopy if $Y$ is fibrant.  Similar remarks hold for other enrichments.

## Remarks 

Path objects and right homotopies also exist in various other situations, for instance, if there is not the full structure of a [[model category]] but just of a [[category of fibrant objects]] is given.  Likewise for cylinder objects and left homotopies in a category of cofibrant objects.

Likewise if there is a [[cylinder functor]], one gets functorially defined [[cylinder object]]s. 

## Related concepts

[[!include homotopy-homology-cohomology]]

* [[homotopy class]]

* [[transfor]]

  * [[natural transformation]]

  * [[pseudonatural transformation]]

  * [[lax natural transformation]]

* [[function extensionality]]

## References 

See the references at [[homotopy theory]] and [[model category]].

[[!redirects left homotopy]]
[[!redirects right homotopy]]

[[!redirects left homotopies]]
[[!redirects right homotopies]]


[[!redirects homotopy (as a transformation)]]

[[!redirects homotopies]]

[[!redirects homotopic]]