
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Algebra
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn #CoreOfARing}
###### Definition

For $R$ a [[commutative ring]], its **[[core of a ring|core]]** $c R$ is the [[regular image]] of the unique map $\mathbb{Z}\to R$ (note that $\mathbb{Z}$ is the [[initial object|initial]] commutative ring).  That is, it is the smallest [[regular monomorphism]] into $R$ in the category of commutative rings.

By the general construction of regular images, this can be computed as the [[equalizer]] of the two inclusions from $R$ into the [[pushout]] $R\sqcup_{\mathbb{Z}} R$.  Since $\mathbb{Z}$ is initial, this is just the coproduct $R\sqcup R$ in $CRing$, which is the [[tensor product]] $R\otimes R$.

Thus the most explicit definition of $c R$ is that it is the [[equalizer]] in

$$
  c R 
    \overset{equ}{\longrightarrow}
  R 
    \stackrel{\longrightarrow}{\longrightarrow}
  R \otimes R
  \,.
$$

A ring which is isomorphic to its core is called a **solid ring**.

=--

([Bousfield-Kan 72, ยง1, def. 2.1](#BousfieldKan72), [Bousfield 79, 6.4](#Bousfield79))

## Classification

+-- {: .num_theorem}
###### Theorem

The following is the complete list of solid rings (def. \ref{CoreOfARing}) up to [[isomorphism]]:

1. The [[localization of a ring|localization]] of the ring of [[integers]] at a set $J$ of [[prime numbers]]

   $$
     \mathbb{Z}[J^{-1}]
     \,;
   $$

1. the [[cyclic group|cyclic]] ring

   $$
     \mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}
   $$

   for $n \geq 2$;

1. the [[Cartesian product|product]] rings 

   $$
     \mathbb{Z}[J^{-1}]
       \times
     \mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}
     \,,
   $$

   for $n \geq 2$ such that each [[prime factor]] of $n$ is contained in the set of primes $J$;

1. the ring cores of product rings

   $$
     c(\mathbb{Z}[J^{-1}] \times \underset{p \in K}{\prod} \mathbb{Z}/p^{e(p)})
     \,,
   $$

   where $K \subset J$ are infinite sets of primes and $e(p)$ are positive natural numbers.

=--

([Bousfield-Kan 72, prop. 3.5](#BousfieldKan72), [Bousfield 79, p. 276](#Bousfield79))


## Properties

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The core of any ring $R$ is solid (def. \ref{CoreOfARing}):

$$
  c c R \simeq c R
  \,.
$$

=--

([Bousfield-Kan 72, prop. 2.2](#BousfieldKan72))

## Related concepts

* [[nilpotent completion of spectra]]

* [[Adams spectral sequence]]


## References

* {#BousfieldKan72} [[Aldridge Bousfield]], [[Daniel Kan]], _The core of a ring_, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, Volume 2, Issue 1, April 1972, Pages 73-81 ([link](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022404972900230))



* {#Bousfield79} [[Aldridge Bousfield]], _The localization of spectra with respect to homology_, Topology 18 (1979), no. 4, 257--281. ([pdf](http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/math/MAT9580/v12/undervisningsmateriale/bousfield-topology-1979.pdf))

[[!redirects cores of rings]]

[[!redirects solid ring]]
[[!redirects solid rings]]
