[[!redirects category-of-G-sets]]
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topos Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea
This entry is about the category of [[G-set|continuous G-sets]], for a [[topological group]] $G$. Continuous $G$-sets are sets $X$ with an action of $G$ that is continuous when $X$ is given the discrete topology.

The category of continuous $G$-sets is a [[Grothendieck topos]], and is closely related to [[Fraenkel-Mostowski models]].

## Definition

Let $G$ be a topological group.
+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

The **category of continuous $G$-sets** is the [[category]] of sets $X$ equipped with a continuous $G$-action $\mu: G \times X \to X$, where $X$ is given the discrete topology, and the morphisms are the $G$-invariant maps. We write the category as $G Set$. In this page, we always let $G$ acts on the left.
=--

There is a simple characterization of when a $G$-action is continuous.
+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition
Let $G$ be a topological group, and $X$ be a set with a $G$ action $\mu: G \times X \to X$. Then the action is continuous if and only if the stabilizer of each element is open.
=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof
See [[G-sets#ContinuousCharacterization|G-sets]].
=--

## Equivalent characterizations

### As a Grothendieck topos

+-- {: .num_theorem}
###### Theorem
Let $G$ be a topological group. Then the category $G Set$ is equivalent to the topos of [[sheaves]] on the atomic [[site]] $(S(G), At)$, where the objects of $S(G)$ are the open subgroups of $G$, and the morphisms $H \to K$ are the left cosets $a K$ such that $U \subseteq a K a^{-1}$, and all non-empty [[sieves]] are covering.

Alternatively, it is the full subcategory of $G Set$ containing objects of the form $G/U$, where $U$ is an open subgroup. 
=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof
See [MacLane and Moerdijk, Chapter III.9](#MaclaneMoerdijk).
=--

### As a comonad algebra
To be included.

### As a classifying topos
To be included.

## Related Concepts
* [[G-set]]
* [[topological G-space]]

## References

Some elementary properties of continuous $G$-sets can be found in books such as

* {#MaclaneMoerdijk} [[Saunders MacLane]], [[Ieke Moerdijk]], _[[Sheaves in Geometry and Logic]]

The formal correspondence between models of [[ZFA]] and toposes of continuous $G$-sets can be found in

* [[Michael Fourman]], _Sheaf models for set theory_ ([pdf](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022404980900961/pdf?md5=0de18da810657bf1ba9de7399d224ec5&pid=1-s2.0-0022404980900961-main.pdf))

[[!redirects category of G-sets]]
[[!redirects category of G set]]
[[!redirects category of G-set]]
[[!redirects categories of G-sets]]
[[!redirects categories of G sets]]
[[!redirects categories of G-set]]
[[!redirects categories of G set]]
[[!redirects category of continuous G sets]]
[[!redirects category of continuous G-sets]]
[[!redirects category of continuous G set]]
[[!redirects category of continuous G-set]]
[[!redirects categories of continuous G-sets]]
[[!redirects categories of continuous G sets]]
[[!redirects categories of continuous G-set]]
[[!redirects categories of continuous G set]]
