
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

##Idea##

A **wheeled graph** in the sense of ([HRY](#HRY)) is a generalization of the notion of a of a [[directed pseudograph]]. What differentiates a wheeled graph from a [[directed pseudograph]] is the notion of an "exceptional cell," which should be thought of as a set of half edges which are not adjacent to any vertex. 

The basic idea behind a wheeled graph is that it is a set of vertices with directed edges between them but also edges that leave and enter the graph. It can also have loops and even edges that are not adjacent to any vertex (called **exceptional edges**, see [[generalized graph]] for more). Moreover, a wheeled graph $G$ is equipped with a coloring, i.e. there is a function $Vt(G)\overset{\kappa}\to \mathcal{C}$ from the vertices of $G$ to a set of colors. Since wheeled operads have inputs and outputs, this makes them suitable for modeling [[PROPs]] and [[properads]]. 

This entry relies on notation defined in [[generalized graph]]. 

## Definitions ##
 The following is the fifth item of Definition 2.5 of [HRY](#HRY):

+-- {: .num_defn }
###### Definition

A wheeled graph is a [[generalized graph]] equipped with a coloring, a direction and a listing (see [here](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/generalized+graph#properties) for definitions of these properties). 
 
=--

## Examples

1. The most elementary wheeled graph (which is also of course an ordinary [[graph]] and a [[quiver]]) is the empty wheeled graph which has the [[empty set]] as its set of flags and as such no vertices or edges. 
1. Any [[quiver]] can be realized as a wheeled graph in an obvious way.
1. There is a graph $I$ with $Flag(I)=\{e_{-1},e_1\}$, $\iota(e_i)=e_i$, $\kappa(e_i)=c$, $\delta(e_i)=i$. This is the **$c$-colored exceptional edge**. It can be represented schematically by 
$$
\uparrow_c.
$$
1. There is a graph $W$ which is identical to $I$ except that $\iota(f_{-1})=f_1$ and $\iota(f_1)=f_{-1}$. This is the **$c$-colored exceptional loop**. The involution $\iota$ can be thought of as "spinning" the loop. It can be represented schematically by
$$
\circlearrowleft_c.
$$

## Related concepts

* [[graph]]

* [[quiver]]

* [[generalized graph]]

* [[PROP]]

* [[properad]]

## References




* Philip Hackney, Marcy Robertson and Donald Yau. _Infinity Properads and Infinity Wheeled Properads_,  Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 2147. Springer, Cham, 2015. [(arxiv version)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1410.6716v2.pdf)
{#HRY} 


