#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}



##A little history:  the beginnings

Algebraic K-theory  grew out of two apparently unrelated areas of algebraic geometry and algebraic 
topology. The second of these, historically, was the development by Grothendieck of (geometric 
and topological) K-theory based on projective modules over a ring, or finite dimensional vector 
bundles on a space, that is the [[Grothendieck group]] of the given ring or of the ring of functions on the space. (The connection between these is that the space of global sections of a finite 
dimensional vector bundle on a nice enough space, $X$ is a finitely generated projective module over 
the ring of continuous real or complex functions on $X$ . This latter aspect is where the link with [[topological K-theory]] comes in.) 

The second input is from  of [[simple homotopy theory]]. [[J. H. C. Whitehead]], following on from earlier ideas of [[Reidemeister]], looked at possible extensions of combinatorial 
group theory, with its study of presentations of groups, to give a [[combinatorial homotopy theory]]. This would take the form of an 'algebraic homotopy theory’ giving good algebraic models 
for homotopy types, and would hopefully ease the determination of homotopy equivalences for instance of polyhedra. The 'combinatorial’ part was exemplified by his two papers on 'Combinatorial 
Homotopy Theory’, but raised an interesting question.

Could one give a 'combinatorial way of generating all homotopy equivalences, (up to homotopy), starting with some 'elementary expansions' and 'contractions'?

He showed the answer was negative, and there was an invariant ([[Whitehead torsion]]) whose vanishing was a necessary and sufficient condition for a homotopy equivalence to be so constructible. That invariant was an element of a group constructed from the stable general linear group over the [[group ring]] of the [[fundamental group]] of the domain space. This was a quotient of what became known as $K_1(\mathbb{Z}\pi_1X)$, that is  the abelianisation of $GL(\mathbb{Z}\pi_1X)$.   

This ties in, even at this basic level with the [[nPOV]] and the processes around categorification. For a ring, $R$, the [[Grothendieck group]], $K_0(R)$, looks at the [[core]] of the category of finitely generated projective modules, and takes its set of connected components, which is just the set of isomorphism classes. This becomes an abelian monoid under direct sum and then a group after group completion. For $K_1(R)$, you are taking the core again, but looking at the category of morphisms in it. If we take $K_0$ of that category we get $K_1$ of the ring. So $K_1$ looks at the loops whilst $K_0$ at the connected components.

##Milnor's $K_2$
Notes for later use.
[[Steinberg group]]
[[universal central extension]]
[[crossed module]]

##Higher algebraic K-theory


### Quillen


###Volodin


###Other forms:
[[Waldhausen S-construction]]

###More recent history and the nPOV.

From the most recent  [[nPOV]], algebraic K-theory is  an [[(∞,1)-functor]] that sends [[stable (∞,1)-categories]] to [[spectra]] -- their [[K-theory]] spectra.

Traditionally the stable $(\infty,1)$-categories that have been considered are those coming from categories of [[chain complex]]es, and in this sense algebraic K-theory is the study of [[K-theory]] of categories more general than that of (bounded [[chain complex]]es of) [[vector bundle]]s on a [[topological space]], which is the topic of [[topological K-theory]].

In its simplest initial form _algebraic K-theory_ provides tools for computing the [[Grothendieck group]] of suitable categories. In its more refined form it studies the [[K-theory spectrum]] assigned to these categories. Crucial tools for this include the  [[Q-construction]] and [[Waldhausen S-construction]].

Types of categories for which a theory of algebraic K-theory exist include notably the notions

* [[Quillen exact category]] 

* [[abelian category]]

* [[Waldhausen category]], 

* [[triangulated category]].

Concrete examples of interest include for instance

* the category of finitely generated [[projective object]]s over a unital $k$-[[associative unital algebra|algebra]], 

* the category of [[coherent sheaf|coherent sheaves]] over a [[noetherian ring|noetherian]] [[scheme]],

* the category of locally free sheaves over a scheme, 

and the like. 

## More Details

There is a universal characterization of the construction of the K-theory spectrum $K(A)$ of a stable $(\infty,1)$-category $A$:

there is an $(\infty,1)$-functor

$$
  U : (\infty,1)StabCat \to N
$$

to a stable $(\infty,1)$-category which is universal with the property that it respects colimits and exact sequences in a suitable way. Given any stable $(\infty,1)$-category $A$, its (connective or non-connective, depending on details) algebraic K-theory spectrum is the hom-object

$$
  K(A) \simeq Hom(U(Sp), U(A))
  \,,
$$

where $Sp$ denotes the stable $(\infty,1)$-category of compact [[spectra]]. (See the references below.)






When one talks about the algebraic $K$-theory of [[ring]]s, one means the algebraic $K$-theory of the corresponding category of (one-sided) finitely-generated projective [[module]]s.

A K-theory should be given by a sequence of [[functor]]s $K_i$ from some class of categories as above to [[abelian group]]s having some similarity to [[derived functor]]s and [[cohomology]] theory for spaces. $K_0$ and $K_1$ are rather classical objects from the 1950s; higher $K$-groups are defined by Quillen in two steps: to a [[Quillen exact category]] $C$ one first associates a $K$-theory space $\mathcal{K}(C)$ (or in better versions, a $K$-theory [[spectrum]]) and then defines $K$-groups as [[homotopy group]]s of that space:
$$K_i(C)=\pi_i(\mathcal{K}(C)).$$  

The $K$-theory space of $C$ in Quillen's version was obtained as a [[classifying space]] of the Quillen $Q$-construction applied to $C$. The $Q$-construction has been refined to more sophisticated [[delooping]] methods by Waldhausen, Karoubi and others.

## References 

A reference for classical constructions is

* [[Charles Weibel]], _The K-Book: An introduction to algebraic K-theory_ ([web](http://www.math.rutgers.edu/~weibel/Kbook.html))
 {#Weibel}

The $(\infty,1)$-categorical picture is described in

* [[Andrew Blumberg]], [[David Gepner]], [[Gonzalo Tabuada]], _A universal characterization of higher algebraic K-theory_ ([arXiv:1001.2282](http://arxiv.org/abs/1001.2282)).
 {#BlumbergGepnerTabuada}

For discussion of stable phenomena in algebraic K-theory, see section 4 of 

* [[Ralph Cohen]], _Stability phenomena in the topology of moduli spaces_ ([pdf](http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/arxiv/pdf/0908/0908.1938v2.pdf))
 {#Cohen}
