The [[stable (infinity,1)-category]] of [[spectrum|spectra]].

category: category
---
n-Lab: In geometry, spectrum is a geometric space constructed from some data. Examples are Gelfand spectrum of a C *-algebra, Grothendieck spectrum of a commutative ring, formal spectrum of a complete noetherian commutative ring, primitive spectrum of a noncommutative (but unital) ring, left spectrum of a noncommutative ring, Rosenberg’s spectrum of an abelian category, Gabriel’s spectrum of indecomposable injectives, Pierce spectrum, Bercovich spectrum in rigid analytic geometry…

Distinguish from spectrum in the sense of homotopy theory.

<http://nlab.mathforge.org/nlab/show/spectrum>

<http://www.ncatlab.org/nlab/show/combinatorial+spectrum>

<http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/coordinate-free+spectrum>

---

Tierney in LNM0087 has notes on the problem of inverting an endomorphism and adding directed colimits to a cat. Also a proof of the stable Dold-Kan correspondence, relating FD-spectra and unbounded chain complexes.

---

Ref: [notes by Dundas](http://www.math.ntnu.no/~dundas/talk/nordfjord.pdf). See also a [blog post by Greg Muller](http://cornellmath.wordpress.com/2007/09/08/wanted-intuition-for-spectra/) and a [survey article by Greenlees](http://front.math.ucdavis.edu/0609.5452). Also the very brief appendix to Lichtenbaum: Motivic complexes. Maybe Whitehead: Recent advances in homotopy theory, and other older sources.

Let us write "space" for [[Simplicial set|simplicial set]].

In algebraic topology, a spectrum is a sequence of simplicial sets $E = \{ E^0 , E^1, \ldots \}$ together with "structure" maps $S^1 \wedge E^k \to E^{k+1}$. A map of spectra is a sequence of maps $\{ f^i : E^i \to F^i \}$ compatible with the structure maps. Get a category $Spt$ of spectra.

Examples: Sphere spectrum, Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum (the 2nd is an $\Omega$-spectrum).

An $\Omega$-spectrum is a spectrum for which the adjoint maps $E^{k+1} \to \Omega E^k$ are homotopy equivalences. These spectra are the fibrant objects in the category of spectra.

Let $X$ be a simplicial set, and $E$ a spectrum. We define $E \wedge X$ to be the spectrum $n \mapsto E^n \wedge X$. We define $E^X$ to be the spectrum $n \mapsto Map(X, E^n)$. Here $Map$ is the mapping space of pointed simplicial sets, see [[Simplicial set]].

The suspension spectrum functor from $Sset_*$ to $Spt$ has a right adjoint, the zero'th space functor (sometimes called the underlying space). The term "underlying space" can also refer to the underlying infinite loop space, $\Omega^{\infty} E = \lim_{\to} \Omega^n E^n$.

We define the homotopy groups of a spectrum as

$$\pi_q E = \lim_{\to } \pi_{q+k} E^k
$$

This defines a functor from spectra to graded abelian groups.

We say that a map of spectra is a stable equivalence if it induces an isomorphism on all homotopy groups. Inverting the stable equivalences produces the stable homotopy category. It is additive, and has a tensor product induced by the smash product.

Every [[Generalized cohomology|cohomology theory]] is represented by a spectrum, and every spectrum represents a cohomology theory. This correspondence is given as follows: For a simplicial set $X$, we define "homology" $E_n(X) = \pi_n(E \wedge X)$ and "cohomology" $E^n(X) = \pi_{-n} E^X$. In particular, taking the homology associated to sphere spectrum, we get the stable homotopy groups of $X$.

We can define a model structure on spectra, by defining WEs and fibrations levelwise, and cofibrations by the lifting property. [Dundas](http://www.math.ntnu.no/~dundas/talk/nordfjord.pdf) (page 43) calls this the pointwise model structure. Using the same cofibrations, and the stable equivalences, he defines a stable fibration to be a map with the RLP wrt all cofibrations which are stable equivalences. This gives the stable model structure on $Spt$.

###Stuff from Adams
Lots of examples.

Subspectrum of a spectrum, relative homotopy groups, and a long exact sequence.

A lot more, see the summary of the book.

###Brief summary of Jardine: Generalized étale cohomology theories
Chapter 1: Smash products of spectra. Defines spectra, cofibration, stable equivalence, stable cofibration. A spectrum is stably fibrant iff all its components are Kan complexes, such that each of the adjoint of the structure maps are weak equivalences. Construction of functorial smash product of two spectra.

A bispectrum can be interpreted as a spectrum object in the category of spectra. Such a thing is formed by the pointed simplicial sets $X^n \wedge Y^m$, together with structure maps in "horizontal and vertical" direction. The problem is to extract a homotopy type from this. In Jardine, will work with Adams' original handicrafted smash product.

Def of fake suspention spectrum and fake loop spectrum of a spectrum $X$. These are adjoint endofunctors of $Spt$.

Also define: n-fold spectrum, admissible function, admissible path, canonical path, canonical composite, diagonal spectrum, function complex, loop spectrum, loops space, partial spectrum, $\Omega$-spectrum.

Chapter 2: Abstract homotopy theory of n-fold spectra. 

Intro: The category of n-fold spectra carries model structure both for the strict (i.e. levelwise) and the stable weak equivalences. The diagonal functor from n-fold spectra to spectra, induces an equivalence of homotopy categories. In other words, n-fold spectra is a model for the stable homotopy category. Analougously, the the stable homotopy categories arising from presheaves of spectra, and from presheaves of n-fold spectra, are equivalent. Keep in mind: The category of presheaves of spectra on a fixed site is not necessarily a model for the ordinary stable homotopy category. In fact, every Grothendieck topology gives rise to its own particular stable homotopy category. However, these theories are not unrelated. We will also show that the stable homotopy categories of presheaves of spectra carry a symmetric monoidal structure, with mult given by smash product, and unit given by the sphere spectrum.

Section 2.1 and 2.2: n-fold spectra, model structures, various compatibilities, equivalence of homotopy cats. 

Section 2.3: Simplicial presheaves and pointed simplicial presheaves on a site. Model structures on these. Local WEs: in the presence of enough points these are defined by being WEs of simplicial sets on the stalks (otherwise, a condition on IMs of certain associated sheaves). Contrast: pointwise WE: each map of sections should be a WE of simplicial sets. Global fibration: lifting propery wrt cofibs which are local WEs. For two simplicial presheaves $X, Y$, have function complex $hom(X,Y)$ which is a simplicial set.

Thm: These defs turn simplicical presheaves into a proper closed simplicial model category.

The category of presheaves of spectra (spectrum object in the category of pointed simplicial presheaves). Sheaf of stable homotopy groups for a presheaf of spectra. Various detail. Def: local stable equivalence of presheaves of spectra. Two defs of cofibs. Model structure.

Globally fibrant models, arise from Godement resolutions, can think of them as nonabelian versions of injective resolutions.

Note: The category of $J$-diagrams in a Grothendieck topos is also a Grothendieck topos. Explicit construction.

Presheaves of n-fold spectra.

The homotopy category of presheaves of spectra (on a site) is a symmetric monoidal category under the smash product construction (compare Adams).

Chapter 3: First applications
Function spectra (right adjoint to smashing on the left). Lots of details.

The abstract norm map for a group action on a spectrum. Also abstract transfer.

Chapter 4: Auxiliary results
In the category of spectra, fiber sequences and cofiber sequences coincide.

Atiyah-Hirzebruch-Whitehead spectral sequence for the $X$-homology $\pi_*(X \wedge K)$ of a pointed simplicial set $K$.

Simplicial spectra and the spectral sequence for the stable homotopy groups of their associated diagonals.

Kan spectra and the equivalence of associated strict homotopy categories with the ordinary category of spectra.

Spectrum and Kan spectrum objects in the category of simplicial abelian groups, and the relation with the derived category for chain complexes of abelian groups. (Extension of the Dold-Kan corr.)

Postnikov towers for spectra.

Chapter 5: K-theory presheaves
Smash prod pairings on K-theory spectra, cup products...

Construction of the K-theory presheaf of spectra, and its Waldhausen-style deloopings. Description of the smash product pairings of spectra which arise from bilinear maps of symmetric monoidal categories.

Much more...

Chapter 6: Generalized étale cohomology theories.

nLab page on [[nlab:Spectrum]]
