This is the beginning of a series that gives an introduction to perturbative quantum field theory (pQFT) on Lorentzian spacetime backgrounds in its precise formulation as perturbative algebraic quantum field theory.

This includes the theories of quantum electrodynamics (QED), quantum chromodynamics (QCD), and perturbative quantum gravity (pQG) -- hence the standard model of particle physics -- on Minkowski spacetime (for particle accelerator experiments) and on comological spacetimes (for the cosmic microwave background) and on black-hole spacetimes (for black hole radiation).

This first part gives an informal survey and a commented list of references.

Perturbation and Non-perturbation.

Often "perturbative quantum field theory" (pQFT) is referred to simply as "quantum field theory" (QFT). However it is worthwhile to make the distinction explicit.

The word "perturbative" means that both the interactions between the fields/particles as well as the quantum effects they exhibit are assumed to be tiny -- in fact infinitesimal  --  perturbations of  the free (non-interacting) classical fields, hence of the undisturbed (matter-)waves freely propagating through the universe, with well-defined amplitudes at each spacetime point. This sounds like a drastically coarse approximation  to the actual interacting and quantum world that we inhabit; and indeed it is. However, a remarkable fact is that this drastically coarse approximation is already extremely rich in phenomena and demanding in mathematical techniques and, most importantly, has been sufficient to explain/predict very many (but not all) the phenomena that are seen in high energy particle scattering experiments, and to high numerical precision.

Nevertheless, eventually one will need to understand non-perturbative quantum field theory. Notably the true vacuum of QCD is believed to escape perturbation theory and to be the cause of basic phenomena such as confinement of quarks, which are quite non-negligible for a complete picture of the world.  But non-perturbative quantum field theory is by and large an open problem, both conceptually and physically. Presently not a single example of an interacting non-perturbative Lagrangian quantum field theory is understood in spacetime dimension ##\geq 4## (besides numerical simulation). For the case of 4d Yang-Mills theory (such as QED and QCD) one single aspect of its non-perturbative quantization (the expected "mass gap") is among the list of "Millenium Problems" of the Clay Institute. Full non-perturbative Yang-Mills theory might be a ##10^4## year problem, and full non-perturbative quantum gravity might be a ##10^5## year problem. But whatever the answer is, a conceptually clean understanding of pQFT theory should be a helpful stepping stone towards these big open problems.

Unfortunately, even pQFT has been notorious for being believed to be conceptually mysterious. Modern textbooks will still talk about "divergencies that plague the theory" and, worse, appeal to the folk lore of the "path integral" without offering precise clues as to its nature, thereby disconnecting the theory from the mathematically informed discourse. This is a historical remnant of the early days of the theory as conceived by Tomonaga, Schwinger, Feynman and Dyson, when many steps still proceeded by educated guesswork


Causal Perturbation Theory.

However, a mathematically rigorous formulation of pQFT on Minkowski spacetime (describing processes seen in particle accelerators such as the LHC experiment) with precise well-defined concepts had been fully established already by 1975, as summarized in the seminal Erice summer school proceedings of Velo-Wightman 76. Among other contributions, this included the formalization of the theory due

    Henri Epstein, Vladimir Glaser,
    "The Role of locality in perturbation theory",
    Annales Poincaré Phys. Theor. A 19 (1973) 211 (Numdam)

which has come to be known as causal perturbation theory.

The key idea of this approach is to define the perturbative scattering matrix of the pQFT by imposing (i.e. axiomatizing) how it should behave -- in particular how it should behave with respect to spacetime causality, whence the name -- instead of trying to define it by a path integral.

The scattering matrix of a pQFT is the collection of all probability amplitudes for a given set of field quanta (particles) coming in from the far past, then perturbatively interacting with each other and hence scattering off each other, to finally emerge in the far future as another set of field quanta. The corresponding scattering probabilities ("scattering cross sections") are manifestly the kind of information that may be measured in the detector of a particle accelerator, where to good approximation the incoming beams are the particles "from the far past" and the hits on the detectors around the point where the beams collide is the particles emerging "in the far future". The theory has to make predictions for which of the many detector cells (at which angles from the colliding beams) is going to be triggered with which ratio given the incoming particle beam, and this is all encoded in the scattering matrix .

In traditional approaches of pQFT, the scattering matrix is written schematically as

$$
S(L_{\text{int}} )
\overset{\text{not really}}{=}
\int \left[D\phi\right] e^{ \tfrac{1}{i \hbar} \int_X L_{\text{free}}(\phi) } \, \exp\left(  \tfrac{g}{i \hbar} \int_X\left( L_{\text{int}}(\phi)  \right) \right)
$$

where the informal schematic right hand side expresses the idea that the probability amplitude for a scattering process is a sum (integral) over all spacetime field configurations ##\phi## (with the given asymptotic behaviour) of the phase determined by the free Lagrangian density ##L_{\text{free}}## and the interacting and Lagrangian density ##L_{\text{int}}## evaluated at that field configuration and integrated over spacetime ##X##.

There is no known way to make sense of this integral. The reason that traditional pQFT textbooks nevertheles make some sense is that all that is really being used are some expected properties that such a would-be integral should have. To make such a reasoning precise, one is to give up on the idée fixe of an actual path integration and simply state exactly which properties the expression ##S(L_{\text{int}})## is actually meant to have!

The key such property of the S-matrix is "causal additivity", which essentially says that all effects caused in some spacetime region must be in the causal future (and past) of that region. The main result of causal perturbation theory is the proof that

    Causally additive perturbative S-matrices exist, hence pQFT exists;
    at each order there is a finite-dimensional space of choices, the renormalization freedom;
    any two such choices are related by a unique re-definition of the Lagrangian densities by counter-terms;
    these re-definitions form a group, the Stückelberg-Peterson renormalization group.

This is known as the main theorem of perturbative renormalization.

A textbook account of QED in causal perturbation theory is

    Günter Scharf,
    "Finite Quantum Electrodynamics – The Causal Approach",
    Springer 1995

and QCD as well as pQG are discussed this way in

    Günter Scharf,
    "Quantum Gauge Theories -- A True Ghost Story",
    Wiley 2001

Perturbative Algebraic Quantum Field Theory.

A key technical tool that allows pQFT in causal perturbation theory to be well-defined is that the interactions of the fields are considered "switched off outside a compact spacetime region" for all possible "adiabatic switchings".

Originally this was considered just an intermediate technical step to separate the issue of "UV-divergencies" (the definition of the S-matrix at coinciding interaction points) from the "IR-divergencies", namely from the issue of taking the "adiabatic limit" of the S-matrix in which the adiabatic switching is removed and interactions are considered over all of spacetime.

But it had been observed already in Il'in-Slavnov 78 that for realistic quantum observables which are supported in a compact region of spacetime all that matters  is that the interaction is "switched on" over the causal closure of the support of the observable, while outside its support it may be "adiabatically switched off" at will without actually changing the value of the observables (up to canonical unitary equivalence). Moreover, the system of spacetime localized perturbative quantum observables obtained this way from the causal S-matrix turns out to satisfy axioms that had earlier been proposed in Haag-Kastler 64 to provide a complete mathematical characterization of the physical content of a pQFT: they form a local net of observables.

Haag-Kastler originally aimed, ambitiously, for axiomatization of the non-perturbative quantum field theory, and hence required the algebras of observables in the local net to be ##C^\ast##-algebras. Their formulation of non-perturbative quantum field theory via local nets of ##C^\ast##-algebras came to be known as algebraic quantum field theory (AQFT). Here in perturbation theory these algebras are just formal power series algebras (in the coupling constant and in Plancks's constant), but otherwise they satisfy the original Haag-Kastler axioms. This way pQFT in the rigorous guise of causal perturbation theory came to be called perturbative algebraic quantum field theory (pAQFT, Brunetti-Dütsch-Fredenhagen 09)

Locally covariant pAQFT.

While there are other equivalent rigorous formulations of pQFT on Minkowski spacetime, causal perturbation theory is singled out as being the one that generalizes well to QFT on curved spacetimes (Brunetti-Fredenhagen 99).  This is important: For example pQFT on cosmological spacetime backgrounds describes the processes whose remnant is seen in the cosmic microwave background, while pQFT on black hole spacetime backgrounds describes black hole radiation.

One reason this works so well is that the axiom of causal additivity, which essentially defines the perturbative S-matrix, manifestly makes sense on general time-oriented spacetimes. But moreover there is some hard analysis which guarantees that the construction proof of the perturbative S-matrix does generalize from Minkowski spacetime to general time-oriented globally hyperbolic spacetimes: This requires finding

    generalizations of the Minkowski vacuum state to curved spacetimes to define the free quantum field theory via its Wick algebra (the "normal-ordered product");
    corresponding Feynman propagators on curved spacetimes to define the perturbative interacting field theory via its time-ordered product.

This is non-trivial, because on general (even globally hyperbolic) spacetimes there exists no vacuum state, since there does not even exist a global concept of particles. But it turns out that time-ordered globally hyperbolic spacetimes do admit quantum states that, while not being vacuum states in general, do satisfy all the properties that are needed for the definition of a free field quantization, these are the known as the Hadamard states, essentially unique up to addition of a regular term (Radzikowski 96). Moreover, each Hadamard state induces a corresponding Feynman propagator on the curved spacetime. With this in hand, the construction of the pQFT on curved spacetime may be obtained closely following the causal perturbation theory on Minkowski spacetime (Brunetti-Fredenhagen 00).

Since this then defines pQFT "covariantly" on all spacetimes, it has come to be called locally covariant algebraic quantum field theory (lcpAQFT).

The traditional toolbox.

Eventually all the traditional lore and tools of pQFT have been (re-)obtained in precise form in the context of pAQFT. For instance

    the Feynman perturbation series of the S-matrix in terms of Feynman diagrams and their dimensional regularization (Keller 10, Dütsch-Fredenhagen-Keller-Rejzner 14);
    the gauge fixed quantization of gauge theories via BRST-BV formalism (Fredenhagen-Rejzner 11, Rejzner 16);
    cosmological perturbation theory (Brunetti-Fredenhagen-Hack-Pinamonto-Rejzner 16)

A fairly comprehensive review of the theory as of 2016, with pointers to the research literature for further details, is in

    Katarzyna Rejzner,
    "Perturbative Algebraic Quantum Field Theory",
    Springer 2016 (web)

From first principles.

Besides precision of our physical theories, we also want them to be conceptually coherent, preferably to follow from a small set of joint principles. While causal perturbation theory / perturbative AQFT is a mathematically precise formulation of traditional pQFT, many of its constructions appear somewhat ad hoc, even though well motivated and certainly right. For instance the causal additivity axiom on the perturbative S-matrix was originally introduced as a really clever guess concerning the generalization to higher dimensional Lorentzian spacetimes of the simple 1-dimenional "path-ordering" in the Dyson formula (known as iterated integrals to mathematicians), and the construction of the interacting quantum observables from the S-matrix by Bogoliubov's formula was mainly motivated from the fact that Bogoliubov gave that formula.

Of course, this being physics, all these constructions are justified by the fact that they do yield a precise formulation of traditional pQFT, and that traditional pQFT receives excellent confirmation in experiment.

But even better than fitting our physical theory to observation in nature would be if we could derive the physical theory from deeper first theoretical principles,  and then still match it with nature.

Here we should ask (at least): What does it mean to quantize any classical theory? And is pQFT the result of applying a general quantization prescription to classical field theory?

For ages people have chanted "The path integral does it!" in reply to this question. But as a matter of fact it does not -- it does not even exist.

There are two general quantization prescriptions that do exist as mathematically well-defined concepts: geometric quantization and algebraic deformation quantization. Remarkably, pAQFT does follow as a special case of formal deformation quantization, and maybe yet more remarkably this was figured out only last year:

    Giovanni Collini,
    "Fedosov Quantization and Perturbative Quantum Field Theory"
    (arXiv:1603.09626)
    Eli Hawkins, Kasia Rejzner,
    "The Star Product in Interacting Quantum Field Theory"
    (arXiv:1612.09157)

The unknown theory.

This shows that despite the more than 40 years since Velo-Wightman 76, we may still be pretty much at the beginning of understanding the true conceptual nature of pQFT.

There are various other hints for this, too. For instance the available techniques for quantizing gauge theory in pQFT disregard the global topological sectors of the gauge field (instantons, argued to be crucial for the true vacuum of QCD). It is not hard to see that if these are to be included, then the space of local qantum observables can no longer be an ordinary algebra, but must become a "homotopical algebra" of sorts (Schreiber 14, Schenkel 14). The principles of such "homotopical AQFT" are being explored (Benini-Schenkel 16, Benini-Schenkel-Schreiber 17), for review see Schenkel 17, but much remains to be done here.

Given that gauge theories and their instanton sectors are not some fringe topic in  pQFT, but concern the core of the key application, the standard model of particle physics, much of the development of the theory may still lie ahead. And this is only pQFT. When this is finally really understood, mankind needs to look into non-perturbative QFT.