
# Čech model structure on simplicial presheaves

Among the various [[model structure on simplicial presheaves|model structures on simplicial presheaves]] (see there for details, background and motivation), the _Čech_ model structure is in between the [[global model structure on simplicial presheaves]] and the [[local model structure on simplicial presheaves]]. The latter is obtained by localizing the global structure at local weak equivalences -- in particular [[hypercovers]] -- , while the Čech structure is obtained by localizing only at [[Čech covers]].

Accordingly, the [[(∞,1)-topos]] [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presented]] by the Čech model structure has as its [[cohomology]] theory [[Čech cohomology]].

See the further remarks at [[hypercover]].

+--{: .query}
[[Mike Shulman]]: Two questions, one (hopefully) easy and one (perhaps) hard:

1. Is there a Quillen equivalent Čech model structure on simplicial *sheaves*?  Can we just lift the model structure for simplicial presheaves along the sheafification adjunction?

1. Is there a characterization of the weak equivalences in either Čech model structure?

I am particularly interested in this for the following reason.  According to Beke in *Sheafifiable homotopy model categories*, the weak equivalences in the [[local model structure on simplicial sheaves]] are precisely those maps $f\colon X\to Y$ of simplicial objects in the corresponding 1-topos of sheaves of sets such that the statement "$f$ is a weak equivalence of simplicial sets" is true in the [[internal logic]] of the topos (at least, interperiting "$f$ is a weak equivalence of simplicial sets" by one particular set of geometric sentences whose interpretation in $Set$ is equivalent to saying that a simplicial map is a weak equivalence).  But if, as [[HTT]] teaches us, Čech descent is often to be preferred to hyperdescent, then we should be interested in Čech weak equivalences instead.  So I would really like to know what it means for a map of simplicial sheaves to be a Čech weak equivalence, in the *internal logic* of the 1-topos of sheaves of sets.  If nothing else, I think such a characterization would help me understand the real meaning of [[hypercompletion]].  But any sort of characterization of them would be better than none.
=--


## References

A detailed though unfinished account of the Čech model structure is given in

* Daniel Dugger, _Sheaves and homotopy theory_ ([web](http://www.uoregon.edu/~ddugger/cech.html), [pdf](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/cech.pdf))

But beware of this document is unfinished. In particular there is some statement somewhere that makes it sound as if Čech covers are equal to hypercovers, while the rest of the text emphasises how they are distinct.


[[!redirects Čech model structure on simplicial presheaves]]
[[!redirects Cech model structure on simplicial presheaves]]
[[!redirects ?ech model structure on simplicial presheaves]]
