
# Idea #

Under the [[Dold-Kan correspondence]] there is an [[equivalence of categories]] relating non-negatively graded [[chain complex]]es in an [[abelian category]] $A$ to [[simplicial object]]s in $A$.

$$
  Ch_+(A) \simeq A^{\Delta^{op}}
  \,.
$$

At least if $A$ is the category of abelian groups, so that $A^{\Delta^{op}}$ is the category of abelian [[simplicial group]]s it inherits naturally a [[homotopical category|homotopical category]] from the [[model structure on simplicial sets]]. This is a very canonical model structure in that it is no less than the [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presentation]] of the archetypical [[(infinity,1)-category]] [[Infinity-Grpd]] of [[infinity-groupoid]].

The model structure on chain complexes transports this presentation  of the special $\infty$--groupoids given by abelian simplicial groups along the Dold-Kan correspondence to chain complexes.

Analogous statements apply to the category of unbounded chain complexes and the canonical [[stable (infinity,1)-category]] [[Spec]] of [[spectrum|spectra]]. 


# History and references#

Of course the above description of categories of chain complexes as ([[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presentations]] of ) special cases of (stable) $(\infty,1)$-categories is exactly opposite to the historical development of these ideas. 

While the homotopical treatment of weak equivalences of chain complexes ([[quasi-isomorphism]]) of chain complexes is at the beginning of all studies of higher categories and a "folk theorem" ever since

* A. Joyal, Letter to Alexander Grothendieck. April 11, 1984

it seems that the injective model structure on chain complexes has been made fully explicit in print only in proposition 3.13 of

* Tibor Beke, _Sheafifiable homotopy model categories_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0102087) [pdf](http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/math/pdf/0102/0102087v1.pdf))

(at least according to the remark below that).

The projective model structure is discussed after that in 

* Mark Hovey, _Model category structures on chain complexes of sheaves_, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 353, 6 ([pdf](http://www.mathaware.org/tran/2001-353-06/S0002-9947-01-02721-0/S0002-9947-01-02721-0.pdf))