
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Fields and quanta
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include fields and quanta - table]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A model for [[dark matter]] made up of massive but extremely light [[particles]], whose [[de Broglie wavelength]] is at the scale of galaxies. 

The idea is that on scales above that of galaxies, the predictions of fuzzy dark matter agree with the standard cold dark matter models that work exceptionally well on [[cosmology|cosmological scales]], while on scales of the size of galaxies the [[quantum physics|quantum]] properties of these light particles become relevant and change their effect just so as to fix the problems (see also [[MOND]]) that standard cold dark matter models have on these scales.

A natural candidate for such ultra-light particles are [[axions]].

This kind of model was brought up independently by several groups of authors (see [Lee 17](#Lee17) for historical survey) with early precursors going back as far as ([Baldeschi-Gelmini-Ruffini 83](#BaldeschiGelminiRuffini83)), and accordingly goes by a number of different names, including the following:

* _[[Bose-Einstein condensate]] (BEC) dark matter_

* _[[superfluid]] dark matter_ ([Berezhiani-Khoury 15](#BerezhianiKhoury15), [Khoury 16](#Khoury16))

* _fuzzy dark matter_ ([Wu-Barkana-Gruzinov 00](#WuBarkanaGruzinov00))

* _ultra-light [[axion]]_

* _wave dark matter_

* _repulsive dark matter_


and more.


## References
 {#References}

Early precursors of the idea include

* {#BaldeschiGelminiRuffini83} M. R. Baldeschi, G. B. Gelmini, and R. Ruffini, Physics Letters B 122, 221 (1983).

The proposal in th guise of "fuzzy dark matter" is originally due to

* {#WuBarkanaGruzinov00} Wayne Hu, Rennan Barkana, Andrei Gruzinov, _Cold and Fuzzy Dark Matter_, Phys.Rev.Lett. 85 (2000) 1158-1161 ([arXiv:astro-ph/0003365](https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0003365)) 

See also

* David J. E. Marsh, _Axion Cosmology_ ([arXiv:1510.07633](https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.07633))

A detailed discussion is in

* {#HOTW16} Lam Hui, Jeremiah P. Ostriker, Scott Tremaine, [[Edward Witten]], _On the hypothesis that cosmological dark matter is composed of ultra-light bosons_,  Phys. Rev. D 95, 043541 (2017) ([arXiv:1610.08297](https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.08297))

Discussion of how [[superfluid]] aspects of [[axion|axionic]] fuzzy dark matter reproduce [[MOND]] [[phenomenology]] is in 

* {#BerezhianiKhoury15} [[Lasha Berezhiani]], [[Justin Khoury]], _Theory of Dark Matter Superfluidity_, Phys. Rev. D 92, 103510 (2015) ([arXiv:1507.01019](https://arxiv.org/abs/1507.01019))

* {#Khoury16} [[Justin Khoury]], _Another Path for the Emergence of Modified Galactic Dynamics from Dark Matter Superfluidity_, Phys. Rev. D 93, 103533 (2016) ([arXiv:1602.05961](https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.05961))

Review of the literatue is in 

* {#Lee17} Jae-Weon Lee, _Brief History of Ultra-light Scalar Dark Matter Models_ ([arXiv:1704.05057](https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.05057))

Numerical simulation is reported in 

* Hsi-Yu Schive, Tzihong Chiueh, Tom Broadhurst, _Cosmic structure as the quantum interference of a coherent dark wave_, Nature Physics 10, 496–499 (2014) ([doi:10.1038/nphys2996](http://www.nature.com/nphys/journal/v10/n7/abs/nphys2996.html))

Experimental bounds are discussed in

* Nilanjan Banik, Adam J. Christopherson, Pierre Sikivie, Elisa Maria Todarello, _New astrophysical bounds on ultralight axionlike particles_, Phys. Rev. D 95, 043542 (2017) ([arXiv:1701.04573](https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.04573))


[[!redirects Bose-Einstein condensate dark matter]]
[[!redirects BEC dark matter]]
