
+-- {: .num_defn #GaloisConnection}
###### Definition
**([[Galois connection]])**

Consider two [[sets]] $X,Y \in Set$ and a [[relation]]

$$
  E \hookrightarrow X \times Y
  \,.
$$

Define two [[functions]] between their [[power sets]] $P(X), P(Y)$, as follows. 
(In the following we write $E(x, y)$ to abbreviate the formula $(x, y) \in E$.)


1. Define 

   $$
     V_E 
       \;\colon\; 
     P(X) 
       \longrightarrow 
     P(Y)
   $$ 

   by 

   $$
     V_E(S) 
       \coloneqq 
     \left\{
       y \in Y \vert  \underset{x \in  X}{\forall} \left( \left(x \in S\right) \Rightarrow E(x, y)
    \right) \right\}
   $$
 
1. Define

   $$
     I_E 
       \;\colon\; 
     P(Y) 
       \longrightarrow
     P(X)
   $$ 

   by 
  
   $$
     I_E(T) \coloneqq \left\{x \in X \vert \underset{y \in Y}{\forall} \left( \left(y \in T \right) \Rightarrow E(x, y)  \right)\right\}
   $$ 

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #GaloisConnectionAsAdjunction}
###### Proposition

The construction in def. \ref{GaloisConnection} has the following properties:

1. $V_E$ and $I_E$ are [[contravariant functor|contravariant]] order-preserving: , if $S \subseteq S'$, then $V_E(S') \subseteq V_E(S)$. 


1. The _[[adjunction]] law_ holds:
   $
     \left( 
        T \subseteq V_E(S) 
     \right) 
       \,\Rightarrow\, 
     \left(
       S \subseteq I_E(T)
     \right)
   $

   which we denote by writing

   $$
     P(X)
       \underoverset{\underset{V_E}{\longrightarrow}}{\overset{I_E}{\longleftarrow}}{\bot}
     P(Y)^{op}
   $$

1. both $V_E$ as well as $I_E$ take [[unions]] to [[intersections]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Regarding the first point: the larger $S$ is, the more conditions that are placed on $y$ in order to belong to $V_E(S)$, and so the smaller $V_E(S)$ will be. 

Regarding the second point:  This is because both these conditions are equivalent to the condition $S \times T \subseteq E$. 

Regarding the third point: Observe that in a poset such as $P(Y)$, we have that $A = B$ iff for all $C$, $C \leq A$ iff $C \leq B$ (this is the [[Yoneda lemma]] applied to posets). It follows that

$$
  \array{
    T \subseteq V_E(\bigcup_{i \in I} S_i) & iff & \bigcup_{i: I} S_i \subseteq I_E(T) \\ 
    & iff & \forall_{i: I} S_i \subseteq I_E(T) \\ 
    & iff & \forall_{i: I} T \subseteq V_E(S_i) \\ 
    & iff & T \subseteq \bigcap_{i: I} V_E(S_i)
}
$$ 

and we conclude $V_E(\bigcup_{i: I} S_i) = \bigcap_{i: I} V_E(S_i)$ by the [[Yoneda lemma]]. 


=--


+-- {: .num_prop #GaloisClosureOperator}
###### Proposition
**([[closure operators]] from [[Galois connection]])**

Given a [[Galois connection]] as in def. \ref{GaloisConnection}, consider the [[composition|composites]]

$$
  I_E \circ V_E \;\colon\; P(X) \longrightarrow P(X)
$$

and

$$
  V_E \circ I_E \;\colon\; P(Y) \longrightarrow P(Y)
  \,.
$$

These satisfy:

1. For all $S \in P(X)$ then  
   $
     S \subseteq I_E \circ V_E(S)
   $ 

1. $I_E \circ V_E$ is [[idempotent]] and [[covariant functor|covariant]].


and

1. For all $T \in P(Y)$ then  
   $
     T \subseteq V_E \circ I_E(T)
   $ 

1. $V_E \circ I_E$ is [[idempotent]] and [[covariant functor|covariant]].



This is summarized by saying that 
$I_E \circ V_E$ and $V_E \circ I_E$ are _[[closure operators]]_ ([[idempotent monads]]).


=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The first statement is immediate from the adjunction law (prop. \ref{GaloisConnectionAsAdjunction}).

Regarding the second statement, observe that for all $S \in P(X)$ then

$$
  V_E \circ I_E \circ V_E (S)  =  V_E(S)
$$

and for all $T \in P(Y)$ then

$$
  I_E \circ V_E \circ I_E (T) = I_E(T)
  \,.
$$

This is because applied to sets $S$ of the form $I_E(T)$, we see $I_E(T) \subseteq I_E \circ V_E \circ I_E(T)$. But applying the contravariant map $I_E$ to the inclusion $T \subseteq V_E \circ I_E(T)$, we also have $I_E \circ V_E \circ I_E(T) \subseteq I_E(T)$. 

This implies that the function $I_E \circ V_E$. is idempotent. 

The argument for $V_E \circ I_E$ is directly analogous.

=--

In view of prop. \ref{GaloisClosureOperator} we say that:

+-- {: .num_defn #GaloisClosedElements}
###### Definition
**(closed elements)**

Given a [[Galois connection]] as in def. \ref{GaloisConnection}, then 

1. $S \in P(X)$ is called *closed* if $I_E \circ V_E(S) = S$;

1. the _closure_ of $S \in P(X)$ is $Cl(S) \coloneqq I_E \circ V_E(S)$

and similarly

1. $T \in P(Y)$ is called *closed* if $V_E \circ I_E(T) = T$;

1. the _closure_ of $T \in P(Y)$ is $Cl(T) \coloneqq V_E \circ I_E(T)$.

=--

It follows from the properties of [[closure operators]], hence form prop. \ref{GaloisClosureOperator}:

+-- {: .num_prop #GaloisFixedPoints}
###### Proposition
**([[fixed point of an adjunction|fixed points]] of a [[Galois connection]])**

Given a [[Galois connection]] as in def. \ref{GaloisConnection},
then

1. the closed elements of $P(X)$ are precisely those in the [[image]] $im(I_E)$ of $I_E$;

1. the closed elements of $P(Y)$ are precisely those in the [[image]] $im(V_E)$ of $V_E$.

We says these are the _[[fixed point of an adjunction|fixed points]]_ of the Galois connection. Therefore the restriction of the Galois connection

$$
  P(X)
    \underoverset{\underset{V_E}{\longrightarrow}}{\overset{I_E}{\longleftarrow}}{\bot}
  P(Y)^{op}
$$

to these fixed points yields an [[equivalence of categories|equivalence]]

$$
  im(I_E)
    \underoverset{\underset{V_E}{\longrightarrow}}{\overset{I_E}{\longleftarrow}}{\simeq}
  im(V_E)^{op}
$$

now called a _[[Galois correspondence]]_.

=--


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Given a [[Galois connection]] as in def. \ref{GaloisConnection}, then the sets of closed elements according to def. \ref{GaloisClosedElements} are closed under forming [[intersections]].

=--


+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof


If $\{T_i \in P(Y)\}_{i: I}$ is a collection of elements closed under the operator $K = V_E \circ I_E$, then by the first item in prop. \ref{GaloisClosureOperator} it is automatic that $\bigcap_{i: I} T_i \subseteq K(\bigcap_{i: I} T_i)$, so it suffices to prove the reverse inclusion. But since $\bigcap_{i: I} T_i \subseteq T_i$ for all $i$ and $K$ is covariant and $T_i$ is closed, we have $K(\bigcap_{i: I} T_i) \subseteq K(T_i) \subseteq T_i$ for all $i$, and $K(\bigcap_{i: I} T_i) \subseteq \bigcap_{i: I} T_i$ follows. 

=--