
+-- {: .num_prop #}
###### Proposition
**(quotient projections out of compact Hausdorff spaces are closed precisely if the codomain is Hausdorff)**

Let

$$
  \pi \;\colon\; (X, \tau_X) \longrightarrow (Y, \tau_Y)
$$

be a [[continuous function]] between [[topological spaces]] such that

1. $(X, \tau)$ is a [[compact Hausdorff topological space]] (def. \ref{CompactTopologicalSpace}, def. \ref{HausdorffTopologicalSpace});

1. $\pi$ is a [[surjection]] and $\tau_Y$ is the corresponding [[quotient topological space|quotient topology]] (def. \ref{QuotientTopologicalSpace}).

Then the following are equivalent

1. $(Y, \tau_Y)$ is itself a [[Hausdorff topological space]] (def. \ref{HausdorffTopologicalSpace});

1. $\pi$ is a [[closed map]] (def. \ref{OpenMap}).

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

The implicaton $\left( (Y, \tau_Y)\, \text{Hausdorff} \right) \Rightarrow \left( \pi \, \text{closed}  \right)$
is given by prop. \ref{MapsFromCompactSpacesToHausdorffSpacesAreClosed}. We need to show the converse.

Hence assume that $\pi$ is a closed map. We need to show that for every pair of
distinct point $y_1 \neq y_2 \in Y)$ there exist [[open neighbourhoods]] $U_{y_1}, U_{y_2} \in \tau_Y$
which are disjoint, $U_{y_1} \cap U_{y_2} = \emptyst$.

Therefore consider the [[pre-images]] 

$$
  C_1 \coloneqq \pi^{-1}(\{y_1\})
  \phantom{AA}
  C_2 \coloneqq \pi^{-1}(\{y_2\})
  \,.
$$

Observe that these are [[closed subsets]], because in the Hausdorff space $(Y, \tau_Y)$ the singleton subsets $\{y_i\}$ are closed 
by prop. \ref{AllPointsClosedEquivalentToT1}, and since pre-images under continuous functions preserves closed subsets by
prop. \ref{ClosedSubsetContinuity}.

Now since [[compact Hausdorff spaces are normal]] it follows that we may find disjoint open subset $U_1, U_2 \in \tau_X$
such that 

$$
  C_1 \subset U_1 \phantom{AAA} C_2 \subset U_2
  \,.
$$

Moreover, by lemma \ref{SaturatedOpenNeighbourhoodsOfSaturatedClosedSubsets} we may find these $U_i$ such that they
are both [[saturated subsets]] (def. \ref{SubsetSaturated}). Therefore finally lemma \ref{SaturatedOpenNeighbourhoodsOfSaturatedClosedSubsets}
say that the images $\pi(U_i)$ are open in $(Y,\tau_Y)$. These are now clearly disjoint open neighbourhoods of $y_1$ and $y_2$. 

=--
