__Михаил Михайлович Постников__, (that is _Mihail Mihajlovič Postnikov_ (in a slavistic transliteration as in ISO9 or G. Shevelov, A prehistory of Slavic, Columbia 1965) or _Mikhail Mikhailovich Postnikov_) is a former Russian (Soviet) topologist (27.10.1927--27.5.2004) and a professor at MGU until his sudden death.

+-- {: .query}
There is no one 'standard' Slavic transliteration into English.  (Maybe there should be, but there isn\'t.)  The closest to a universal standard is (I think) ISO9, <del markdown="1">but that is language-dependent and doesn\'t match either transliteration above for Russian</del><ins markdown="1">(no longer true, since 1995)</ins>.  (See [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Romanization_of_Russian) for discussion of several methods.)  ---Toby

If one uses word TRANSLITERATION that means letter for letter; thus all nonbijections are EXLUDED. For example,
using y both for hard i and for the liquid j. The transliteration was standard BEFORE the computer era, for example is the libraries of Soviet Union and in Slavistic jornals and textbooks like the one above. My librarian in Croatia for example would NEVER make a mistake. Another thing is America where the Russian emigracy tried to make spellings to fit the American-English ear and invented things like KH (two letters for one in cyrillic) and made nonbijective things like with hard i/j merger, and neglected hard sign and so on; French and German did similar francophone adaptation resulting in Gourevich for (ou for u) and Gurevitsch (=4 letters for ч). These are all not accepted by the librarian systems in Russia and Eastern Europe where they are pretty homogeneous. I do not consider the computer era additions (when the literacy sensibility went down in comparison to library period very relavant. For example ISO9 you mention uses for Serbian nonstandard 
signs in order to have compatibility of many languages at the same time, while every child in Serbia knows how to write their cyrillic into latinic with 1-1 correspondence.
I also did not say "transliteration into English" as this makes no sense, transliteration is about letter signs not meaning, syntax etc. and language includes meaning and syntax. I meant Slavic-style transliteration standard into Latinic script; as all slavic languages with latinic standard (Czech, Slovak, Slovene, Croatian, Polish...) use the diacritics, I assume the diacritics are used (unlike in English alphabet) j is glide sound but x, w are not used. But for hard i one uses y, in most transliterations, including the slavic standard like in the book above. 
-- Zoran 

_Toby_:  Zoran, there *are* no bijections between the Latin and Cyrillic alphabets; they have different cardinalities.

An injection from Cyrillic strings to Latin strings is all that you really need, and that doesn\'t rule out using 'H' as a modifier.  OK, you can increase the cardinality of the Latin alphabet by including letters with diacritics, but this clashes with diacritics on the Cyrillic letters!  Then there is the cold fact that Serbocratian, the one language that is (or was) widely used in both scripts, does *not* use an injection from Cyrillic strings to Latin strings (as 'DZH' may be 'ДЖ' or 'Џ'), contrary to what you said 'every child in Serbia' knows.  (Of course, for *practical* purposes, this system is perfectly good.  A modifier 'H' is also perfectly good for practical purposes, even one also uses 'H' for 'Х' or 'Г'.)  Not to mention all of the non-Slavic languages that were given Cyrillic scripts in the Soviet era and now have their own Latin scripts.  The sad fact is that there is no single transliteration systems that works for all purposes.

It should be no surprise that different transliteration systems are used for different languages (source or target) with the same scripts.  While languages do *include* such irrelevant features as meaning and syntax, that is not *all* that they are (besides the script itself).  English doesn\'t like diacritics as much as many other languages with the Latin script, Ukrainian and Serbian have very different traditions when it comes to 'H', and so on.  But no matter; I\'m happy to generalise from the English language to the Latin script if you like, as it can only strengthen my case there is no single standard that works for all purposes.

Please don\'t get me wrong; I *like* slavistic transliteration.  I wish that it were more widely used, and I wish that it worked for everything.  And I don\'t mind at all that you use it here.  I only object to the claim that it is the (or the only) standard, or the claim (which I don\'t think that you have made) that anything else is wrong.

_Zoran_: No it is not correct that DŽ is two letters -- in Croatian standard valid when this sound was used this was learned not as two letters but as one -- it is considered as only one symbol, and it corresponds to ONE phoneme. In 1 st grade school I learned 30 letters including DŽ. Thus it is bijection. I consider the quetsion if one resolves such things by combinations or by diacritics less important for our discussion. More important is that KH-like conventions are wrong by having merging two different sounds into y and also using KH for what h or x would be perfectly enough; this version does not use single h for some reason. By BIJECTION I mean bijection between the cyrillic script of Russian and set of Latin letters used with diacritics used in Shevelov. The extra English letters (x and w) are not Latin standard of say Latin Latin or Italian Latin which was used when adding diacritics in Czech, and of course one can spoil the bijection by adding national letters of various versions like English or French. Polish added w, what other Slavic Latin script did not, probably by influence of German. I do NOT claim that cyrillic of Soviet non-Russian people like in Georgia can be consisently trasnliterated the way Russian can. 

_Toby_:  What is the difference between 'DŽ' and 'KH'???  If 'DŽ' can be one letter, why not 'KH'?  As for why one might not use 'H' or 'X', 'H' is very convenient as a modifier and one wants to avoid amibiguity (not to mention that some people use 'H' for 'Г' in Ukrainian, but maybe that is their fault), and almost no language with the Latin script uses 'X' in that way.  If anything, 'KH' is better than 'DŽ' (if 'H' is used only as a modifier), since it allows an injection from Cyrillic strings to Latin strings modulo appearance (since even if you think of 'DŽ' as a single letter, it looks identical to 'D' followed by 'Ž'; you can introduce a dot as in 'D·Ž' if you want to indicate 'ДЖ', something that will never arise with 'KH' if 'H' is only a modifier).  So the 'KH' convention is not *wrong*, it is *different*.  Compared to other conventions, it has both good and bad points.

Incidentally, 'X' has been part of the Latin alphabet since it began; 'Y' and 'Z' were added later but within the classical period; and the distinctions between 'I' and 'J', between 'U' and 'V', and between 'W' and 'UU' or 'VV' are the latest changes (not counting letters like 'Þ' and 'Ŋ' that aren\'t used in modern English).  Indeed, the usage of 'W' in Polish is much older than the usage of 'Ј' (the Cyrillic letter) in Serbian.

Of course, if we\'re only talking about Russian, and not other languages such as Georgian, then why are the historical practices in Serbia and Croatia even relevant?  Those are the basis (originally) for the slavistic systems that produce 'Mihajlovič'.

Once again, I like that sort of system, and I don\'t object to it at all.  I only object to the claim that it is the only standard or that anything else is wrong.

_Toby_:  I have just had a look at the latest (1995) version of ISO9, which for some reason I had not seen before.  It is pretty impressive!  It relies on some rather obscure double diacritics, and of course it cannot handle the application of arbitrary diacritics to Cyrillic letters, but it does seem to handle every historic and contemporary national alphabet (from Old Church Slavonic to Mongolian).  Perhaps we can compromise and just say 'ISO9' instead of 'standard'; ISO9 is still not the only standard, but it has strong credentials and it does produce 'Mihajlovič'.  (If you want to see if it agrees with Шевельов on everything, try checking [here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_9).)
=--

His thesis under the mentorship of [[L S Pontrjagin|L. S. Pontrjagin]] ([ru.wiki](http://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Понтрягин,_Лев_Семёнович)), contained a construction of a homotopical decomposition of a topological space into a tower of [[fibration]]s (now called a [[Postnikov tower]]) and cohomological invariants ([[Postnikov invariant]]s) which together with the tower form a "system" ([[Postnikov system]]). The use of these data enabled him to effectively encode the full [[homotopy type]] of a space. 

After his early work, Postnikov dedicated himself to teaching, leading a famous seminar at MGU, and advising students (among most successful of his students is Rudyak) and largely neglected his own research. As a clear and superb lecturer, he also wrote several volumes of advanced textbooks in geometry and topology, and a booklet on Galois theory. Unfortunately, he also dedicated much of his efforts and time to an alternative history, considered pseudoscience by the mainstream. Some of his mathematical memoirs may be found in the book _Golden Years of Moscow Mathematics_, by Smilka Zdravkovska (AMS, 2nd ed. 2007).

See also [Postnikov at ru.wikipedia](http://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Постников,_Михаил_Михайлович)

The standard reference for Postnikov systems in homotopy theory is 

* George Whitehead, _Elements of homotopy theory_, chapter 9.


category: people