[[!redirects Cech homotopy]]
##Idea and discussion##
In Čech cohomology, in its *traditional* form, you resolve the space by a inverse system  or [[pro-object]], $\check{C}(X,-)$, of nerves of open covers (or if you prefer the nerves of the corresponding sheaf  of groupoids). For constant and Abelian coefficients (and we will keep to those for the moment), $A$, we throw $H^n(-,A)$ at this pro-object.  As cohomology switches 'variance' we get a _direct system_ or _ind-object_ of Abelian groups, and usually we then take its (direct) limit (i.e. its colimit) to get $\v{H}^n(X,A)$.

Now dualise ... .  Replace cohomology by homotopy $[A,-]$, but although there will be some very useful long exact (Puppe) sequences available in homotopy, we cannot go this way to get them!  In dualising, things can go slightly 'wrong'. We have $[A,\check{C}(X,-)]$ is a pro-object and so we should take limits not colimits to get thet thing we want, but $lim$ is not an exact functor on the usual categories available here, such as groups, sets, modules, etc. 

There is another problem, coherence!  $\check{C}(X,-)$ is a pro-object in the homotopy category of simplicial sets, not in the category of simplicial sets itself.  It is a homotopy coherent system, but the choices of covering refinement maps cause the problem.  

We are very near the topics discussed in [[shape theory]], [[Cech methods]] and [[strong shape theory]] (when that has been written!).
One interpretation of Čech homotopy is shape theory, but that does not usually handle the 'homotopy is dual to cohomology' idea so this will need more work here.

+--{: .query}
That is a start on it anyhow!
=--
[[!redirects Cech homotopy]]

