Topological (in) Hegel

Topological Notions of Qualitative quantity 
and Multiplicity in Hegel’s Fourfold of Infinities

Borislav G. Dimitrov

Hegel’s categories of quality and quantity, in particular ‘qualitative quantity’ in relation with his concepts of space, time, place are subject to which much attention has not been paid by Hegel’s expositors and commentators and yet the importance of it cannot be denied. (Haldar,1932). 

Topological reading of ‘qualitative quantity’ within Hegel’s fourfold (manifold) of multiplicity is subject that lack attention at all from Hegel’s commentators. This conceptual gap, ontological, epistemological, phenomenological is widening within the ‘linguistic turn’, ‘spatial turn’ or ‘topological turn’ and emerging topological approaches to various fields of social science and their need for deep conceptualization based on the philosophical categories, notions and concepts. As Richard Ek establishes in Theorizing the Earth (2010), “The spatial turn is actually a ‘philosophical turn’ repackaged and promoted as a fundamental concern with question of space, place and polity in the social sciences and humanities.” (Ek, Richard, Mekonnen, T. 2010:49-66) 

John WP Phillips, who critically examines the recent arguments asserting a ‘topological turn’ in culture, the range of topologically informed interventions in social and cultural theory, remarkes in his paper On Topology (2013) , that such contemporary fashionable notions of ‘topological approaches’ and ‘becoming topological of culture’ “demands a greater critical reflection than the notion of a ‘topological turn’ suggests.” 

I believe that such demand of critical reflection shall be based on Hegel’s categories of logic, notions and concept, and following my assertion that ‘topological’ in intuitively presented by Hegel in his logic, dialectic and method, with the present thesis I argue how Hegel’s categories of qualitative and quantitative, the concept of space, time and place can provide contemporary researcher with the power and methodology of such a greater critical reflection, and ability to readdress in the new and enhanced mode the variety of these toplogical approaches. The methodology of an applied philosophical topology shall be based on the topological re-reading of Hegel and topological hermeneutics. 

The main objective of the present thesis is to demonstrate how Hegel’s categories, concepts, language, syntax and semantics, his use of rethorical power exibit topological notions and thus the reading of topological (in) Hegel is open for conceptualization. 

Perhaps it would not be an exaggeration to say that there is no system of thought more intimately bound up with one fundamental principle than is the system of Hegel. My assertion with the present thesis is that topological reading of Hegel reviels true topological system, thus there are reasonable grounds for us to see the doctrine of Hegel, in particular his Science of Logic and Philosophy of Nature as Hegel’s Analysis Situs. 

A correct interpretation of Hegel’s system depends upon a thorough comprehension of the categories of quality and quantity, the concepts of space, time, and place. If these categories and concepts are neglected, the system must remain a sealed book. The aim of the present thesis is to unseal the topological character of Hegel’s though, that influenced the formation and presence of topological thinking within the tradition of later continental philosophy and directs toward the horizon of new philosophical topology. 

The concern of the present thesis is to set forth topological reading and interpretation of such categories as quality and quantiny, in particular the qualitative quantity within Hegel’s forfold of multiplicity and such concepts as space, time, place, to emphasize on the importance of topological (in) Hegel for a theory of knowledge, and, in the light of it, and to give some insight toward the current philosophical topology. 

The aim of the thesis is to critically examine whether it is methodologically possible to combine mathematical rigor – topology with a systematic dialectical methodology in Hegel, and if so, to provide as result of my interpretation the outline of Hegel’s Analysis Situs, also with the proposed models (build on the topological manifold, cobordism, topological data analysis, persistent homology, simplicial complexes and graph theory, to provide an indication of how the merger of Hegel’s dialectical logic and topology may be instrumental to a systematic logician and of how a systematic dialectical logic perspective may help mathematical model builders.

Abstract

The present study is interdisciplinary, involving the interrelations between philosophy and topology, where topology is understood in both meanings as mathematical discipline and rhetorical notions, and culminating to what I regard as topological philosophy or philosophical topology, based in particular on Hegel’s notion of multiplicity, implemented in his logic unfolding the true topological fourfold of infinities, where qualitative and quantitative, spatial and temporal, as well as rhetorical notions such as the four basic tropes of rhetoric: ‘metaphor’, ‘metonymy’, ‘synecdoche’, ‘ironi’ are presented in Hegel’s manifold (Mannigfaltigkeit)  of infinities, quality and quantity, time and space. Not only these four basic tropes of rhetoric are equally presented in Hegel’s philosophical narratives, but also the emphasis is on the metonymy seen as metonymy of metonymy or ‘metalepsis’, is strongly presented in Hegel’s logic, in particular in his ‘topological’ notion of Qualitative quantity.

The study investigate in particular the categories of ‘quality’, ‘quantity’ and ‘measures’ within the notions of ‘multiplicity in Hegel’s dialectical logic, with an emphasis on the topological notion of qualitative quantity - the category that remained ‘inapparent’ within the well know dialectics of transformation of quality to quality, where the new quality appears as leap (nodal line) exhibiting abrupt changes and discontinuous transformation leading to the new measure. The exhibit form of Hegel’s qulitative quantity is related with continuous changes and smooth, gradual, topological transformations. The gradualness of such transformations demonstrates topological homeomorphism as exhibit form of the category of qualitative quantity, which can be successfully implemented in mathematical, indeed topological models and methods, such as topological manifold, cobordism, topological data analysis, persistent homology, simplicial complexes and graph theory. 

The topological notions of multiplicity in Hegel’s fourfold of infinities is discussed: (1) the bad qualitative infinity; (2) the good qualitative infinity; (3) the bad quantitative infinity; (4) the good quantitative infinity, related with the fourfold interplay of the two pair of Ancient Greek categories of ‘time’ and ‘space’ as fourfold constructed of ‘Chronos’ and ‘Kairos’, ‘Chora’ and ‘Topos’ as follow: (1) chronochora, chronotopos, kairochora and kairotopos - where the four categorical models implements the following: ‘quantitative quantity’ – ‘quantitative quality’ -  ‘qualitative quantity’ – ‘qualitative quality’. The claim supported is that ‘quality’ is in the core of ‘quantitative infinity’, ‘infinity’ is a quality of quantity – ‘Qualitative quantity’.

There is homology between Hegel’s fourfold of infinities (multiplicity) and the fourfold of Hegel’s judgments (Judgment of Existence; Judgment of Reflection; Judgment of Necessity; Judgment of the Notion). The true topological character of Hegel’s logic is revealed as coherence between Hegel’s fourfold of infinities (multiplicity) and the fourfold of Hegel’s judgments, between method and subject matter, and this topological character is presented in Hegel through the double negation, where the Understanding and its negation, Dialectical Reason, and the Negation of the Negation – Speculative Reason, can be seen in the fourfold of Hegel’s judgments. In the very last chapter of Hegel’s Science of Logic, method and subject matter supposedly conjoin.   (Carlson 2005). 

Following William Lawvere’s assertion (Lawvere, 1996)   that a significant fraction of Hegel’s Logic can be modeled mathematically through the use of “cylinders” (diagrams of shape Δ) in a category, wherein the two identical subobjects (united by the third map in the diagram) are “opposite”.about the use of “cylinders” (diagrams of shape Δ), my interpretation of Hegel’s Objective Logic offer methodological modeling of the categories, based on cylinders - the ‘cobordism’, and on the shape Δ  - the ‘simplicial complex’ (simplicial complexes). 

Hegel’s fourfold of infinities is build on the fourfold of quality and quantity ratio – the notions and ratios of quantitative quantity; quantitative quality; qualitative quantity; qualitative quality. The fourfold of the qualitative and quantitative ratios, relate to the fourfold of the measure. All measures are ratios of two other measures. Measure is twofold, divided into two—the external and the internal measure.  This is the dialectical real of the real measure. Measure is the unity of quality and quantity, yet in the center of the series of measures is a master signifier that organizes everything, even while escaping measurement. This ‘master signifier’, the empty center between quality and quantity is like the hole of the torus, the nothing, the void, and Hegel names it ‘substrate.’ The substrate is discontinuous within the series of measure and continuous at the same time. The substrate is what Hegel calls a true infinity. Substrate can be organized in a series of measures. Substrate is abstract measureless. What is important to see at this point in relation to measure is entailed in a duality between the nodal relation of quantity and quality, on the one side, and substrate, on the other side. The first side is measure as such—quantity and quality. The second side—the substrate—is something deeper than quantity and quality.  

The model of Cobordism (Rene Thom) is proposed as topological model of Hegel’s fourfold of infinities within his concept of multiplicity. For Hegel multiplicity means the quantification of quality and the qualification of quantity, multiplicity of the double-entendre implemented in the inevitable double-meaning of Qualitative quantity. For Hegel, the inability to read history as two-sided, as both continuous and discrete, to co-board between, into, within this twofold, to see beings as double, as both qualitative and quantitative, is the road to the destruction of spirit. Trough the ‘Topological’, Hegel’s logic and dialectics are seen in the current. Today, it is Hegel who give us the true, current, topological reply on the question - What does it mean to think multiplicity as both quality and quantity? 

Topological is subject to philosophical  systematization, as well as the philosophical is subject to topological (mathematical) formalization. In the development of philosophy and mathematics (mathematical and philosophical Mind) there is mathesis universalis and some "problematic situations" that have a common "categorial" structure to study them and the "method" of the study can not be other than "mathematical (topological) modeling" or "explication" of philosophical "categories" and together with it – categorial (philosophical) "interpretation" of the mathematical (topological) "structures". Philosophical-topological (mathematical) Mind and mathematical (topological)-philosophical Mind have one and the same "subject", to whom study apply with the two "polar-opposite” of its  "form" methods, or studying the same "subject" in the two polar-opposite "forms" through "method", which is inherently "the same". 

Novel ‘topological’ reading of Hegel’s notions of spatial and temporal, qualitative and quantitative, is proposed as fundamental in re-thinking of the evolution of hierarchical systems.

The evolution of hierarchical systems is approached topologically as specific ‘problem situation’ for mathematical and philosophical mind, in the term of Philosophical Analisis Situs, where philosophical aspect is present through the categories of Hegel’s multiplicity – the dialectics and logic of ‘qualitative’ and ‘quantitative’, spatial and temporal, and mathematical aspect is presented through the models, such as Cantor Set, logistic map, bifurcation diagrams and topological notion of Cobordism.
 
In addition to the Hierarchical (vertical evolution) relations, an emphasis on the topological notion of qualitative quantity in Hegel, reveals the role of Heterarchy and heteronomy in Evolution (horizontal evolution), since the exhibit form of Qualitative quantity is related with continuous changes and smooth, gradual, topological transformations. The gradualness of such transformations demonstrates topological homeomorphism as exhibit form of the category of Qualitative quantity, which could be successfully implemented in mathematical, indeed topological models and methods.

Hegel’s notions of manifold presented in the model of Rene Thom’s cobordism  is discussed and implemented through the logistic map of Feigenbaum bifurcation Diagram accepted as universal scenario of development, change and evolution.

The proposed outcome demonstrate that within the interval of chaos, marked in the Feigenbaum Diagram, where the parameter ‘a’ increase over the value of 3.0 in the higher octaves of 4.33 , the ‘voices’ of Hegel and Cantor are present within the region of chaos known as Cantor dust.  In the zone of chaos and Cantor dust, Hegel’s multiplicity and four measures works in progress and logic breaths the thin air of being retrieving itself in metaphysic. Beyond the octaves of the values 4.33 in Feigenbaum bifurcation Diagram, within the chaos, there are the heads of Canto comets or the divergence diagrams,
where can be found the seeds of the new orders and multiplicity (manifolds) of new bifurcations and Feigenbaum diagrams. The visible ‘white’ corridors of homeostasis are windows open for new hierarchies of order and possibilities of development. Based on the said proposition, the focus of the present paper is on the evolutionary scenario, where in addition to the currently accepted paradigm of hierarchy of evolutionary systems where the core of representation is through the phylogenetic tree structure (vertical evolution), the
thesis of reticulate (horizontal evolution) is asserted and discussed as exhibiting the heterarchy and heteronomy of evolutionary systems.

The standard evolutionary representation, the phylogenetic tree, and the notion of hierarchy of evolutionary systems, faithfully represents the vertical evolution, but cannot capture horizontal, or reticulate, events, which occur when distinct clades merge together to form a new hybrid lineage. Both hierarchy and heterarchy of the tree structure and the structure of reticulate events could be mathematically investigated, modeled and represented through the field of algebraic topology known as Topological Data Analysis, where the primary
mathematical tool considered is a homology theory for point-cloud data sets—persistent homology—and a novel representation of this algebraic characterization— simplicial complex and barcodes.

The persistent homology in evolution, which characterizes global properties of a geometric object that are invariant to continuous deformation, such as stretching or bending without tearing or gluing any single part of it, and the  properties that includes such notions
as connectedness, is the current method of implementation of Hegel’ topological logic of multiplicity and Qualitative quantity.

. . .
Chapter 4	Topological (in) Hegel

1.	The Qualitative quantity in Hegel

1.1.	Qualitative quantity in Hegel’s “Encyclopedia of Philosophical Sciences”, Part One, referred to as The Lesser Logic

Hegel discusses Qualitative quantity in his Logics – “The Science of Logic” /Wissenschaft der Logik, referred to as the Greater Logic /1812, 1813, 1816/ and The Lesser Logic /Part One of the “Encyclopedia of Philosophical Sciences” / Enzyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse /1817/. 

Qualitative quantity in Hegel’s “Encyclopedia of Philosophical Sciences”, 
Part One, referred to as The Lesser Logic

In § 105 and § 106 of the Lesser Logic (Hegel, G.W.F. 1817: p.170/171-353/354) , Hegel defines “Qualitative quantity, or Measure” in the following lines:

“The two sides of the ratio are still immediate quanta: and the qualitative and quantitative characteristics still external to one another. But in their truth, seeing that the quantitative itself in its externality is relation to self, or seeing that the independence and the indifference of the character are combined, it is Measure. 

Thus by means of the dialectical movement which has now been discussed, the movement of quantity through its several stages, quantity turns out to be a return to quality. The first notion of quantity presented to us was that of quality abrogated and absorbed. That is to say, quantity seemed an external character not identical with Being, to which it is quite immaterial. This notion, as we have seen, underlies the mathematical definition of magnitude, as what can be increased or diminished. At first sight this definition may encourage a belief that quantity is merely whatever can be altered: " increase and diminution alike implying determination of magnitude otherwise " and may tend to confuse it with determinate Being, the second stage of quality, which in its notion is similarly conceived as alterable. We can, however, complete the definition by adding, that in quantity we have something which alters, but which in spite of its changes still remains the same. The notion of quantity, as it thus turns out, implies an inherent contradiction.

This contradiction is what forms the dialectic of quantity. The result of the dialectic however is not a mere return to quality, as if that were the true and quantity the false notion, but an advance to the unity and truth of both, to qualitative quantity, or Measure.” (The Lesser Logic, § 106), (Hegel, G.W.F. 1817: p.170/171-353/354). 

According to David Gray Carlson, “Measure is the third and last province in the kingdom of Quality, which itself comprises the first third kingdom in the empire of the Science of Logic. When Measure concludes, we will have arrived at the portal of the negative, correlative underworld of shadowy Essence.” (Carlson, D.G. 2003). Carlson states that “Hegel proclaims the development of Measure to be ‘extremely difficult,’ and many commentators have concurred. We can nevertheless describe the theme of Measure easily enough—change; more precisely, an exploration of the difference between qualitative and quantitative change.” (Carlson, D.G. 2003.)

The quality of the quantity is derived from §105 of The Lesser Logic, (Hegel, G.W.F. 1817: p.170-353) where Hegel states: “That the Quantum in its independent character is external to it self, is what constitutes its quality” and “In that externality it is itself and referred connectively to itself. There is a union in it of externality, i.e. the quantitative, and of independency (Being-for-self)-the qualitative.” Also “The Quantum when explicitly put thus in its own self is the Quantitative Ratio, a mode of being which, while, in its Exponent, it is an immediate quantum, is also mediation, viz. the reference of some one quantum to another, forming the two sides of the ratio. But the two quanta are not reckoned at their immediate value: their value is only in this relation.” (Hegel, G.W.F. 1817: p.170-353)

In § 106, Hegel claims that “This contradiction is what forms the dialectic of quantity. The result of the dialectic however is not a mere return to quality, as if that were the true and quantity the false notion, but an advance to the unity and truth of both, to qualitative quantity, or Measure.

It may be well here to draw attention to the circumstance, that if we employ quantitative terms in our observation of the world of objects, it is in all cases the Measure \which we have in view, as the goal of our operations. This is hinted at even in language, when the ascertainment of quantitative features and relations is called measuring.” (Hegel, G.W.F. 1817: p.171-354)

For Hegel, Measure "has within itself the difference from itself", and Carlson’s comment is that “when difference was simply external, we had before us quantitative difference. But now, having been captured by Measure, this difference is a qualitative moment.” (Carlson D.G. 2003). Regarding Essence, Measures are brought together by an external measurer. The Measures are ready to be brought together. Measure therefore is, as Hegel will later say, "the immanent quantitative relationship of two qualities to each other." Each Measure imposes quantitative change on the other Measure. Each Measure has a qualitative resilience against the change imposed upon it from the outside. If this resilience is isolated and considered on its own, we have the Measureless or Essence. (Carlson D.G. 2003). As Carlson puts it “for the moment, Quality and Quantity are still with us, but in mediated form. Each of these extremes in the syllogism of Measure is equally the one and the other. This was not so before. In Quality, the Understanding grasped Being as an affirmative immediacy. In Quantity, the Understanding learned that the negative, quantitative moment of Continuity was the truth of Being. Now the Understanding sees that the qualitative and the quantitative are two Verona houses both alike in dignity. The difference between them is indifferent and so is no difference." (Carlson D.G. 2003).

Carlson state that “The difference between Quality and Quantity has been sublated. In Ratio, Quantity showed itself to be a return-into-self. This very reflection-into-self is Quality.” (Carlson D.G. 2003).

For Carlson, “Quantity is open to mere qualitative change. Quantitative change is change imposed from the outside. The very quality of quantum was that it was indifferent to change imposed upon it from outside. Qualitative change is self-imposed change from the inside. We will learn, however, that genuine qualitative change depends on quantitative change.” (Carlson D.G. 2003).

The elaboration between qualitative and quantitative in the Measure was not a single act of writing but complex task for Hegel. Hegel warns that the development of Measure is "extremely difficult" ("Eine der schwierigsten Materien."  (Carlson, 2003:2). This remark Hegel added to the version of the Science of Logic from 1831. Hegel renounced this conclusion in the 1817 "Heidelberg" Encyclopedia of Philosophical Science, and then omitted the renunciation in the later Berlin editions of the Encyclopedia. In the Heidelberg version from 1817 Hegel used a "single" transition from Quality to Quantity, and a "single" transition back. In this single transition, only vanishing was emphasized. In Berlin editions of the Encycolpedia from 1827 and 1830, Hegel realized that there was a "double" transition, where each side of the syllogism vanishes and sustains itself. This leads Hegel to withdraw his renunciation of his earlier work due to the fact that empirical quanta are not entirely unrelated to Logic.    Errol Harris asserts that Measure is “extraordinarily difficult . . . so obscure as to be, for the most part, hardly intelligible, and, while it contains some astonishingly prescient scientific comments, it also indulges in what, to us in the twentieth century, must appear ill-informed and perverse polemic against sound scientific insights.”  (Harris, 1983:149)

The theme of Measure can be described with one word, easily enough as David Carlson suggests. This word is change, change seen as “an exploration of the difference between qualitative and quantitative change.” (David G. Carlson, 2003, Hegel’s Theory of Measure). 

As I stated above, for Hegel the relationship of concepts in judgement is a form of transition (Übergehen) and this transition is related with ‘becoming’ and ‘change’. Hegel uses the word “transition” together with words such as ‘becoming’ and ‘change’. The subject and the predicate are different phases in the judgement. The judgement is a transition and the syllogism is transition as well, but unlike the judgement, it is a mediating transition.

Here I shall emphasize that the words used above, namely: ‘exploration of difference between’ suggest topological notions. The nature of the ‘change’ changed itself through the journey of development of quality and quantity in the Science of Logic. The face of Quality and the face of Quantity change as well through the development of Hegel’s logic. Their role is shifting as well. There are three main forms, faces, roles that both Quality and Quantity shift through this development. The first stage of they change is the Understanding, then the next stage is Dialectical Reason and the third stage is the Speculative Reason. Understanding – Dialectical Reason – Speculative Reason, are the three stages of exploration of the difference between qualitative and quantitative change. 

As David Carlson elaborates “Change has itself changed (over our journey). (David G. Carlson, 2003, Hegel’s Theory of Measure). Carlson call this transition of the transition - “wastransition.” Being became Nothing, Determinate Being became Negation, The Finite ceased to be. Starting with the True Infinite, however, change itself changed. 

The True Infinite did not cease to be. It stayed what it was even while it became something different. This was the beginning of ideality. In the True Infinite, immediate Being ceased to be and preserved itself in an idealized form. When Being ceased to be (while surviving as the mere memory of immediacy), we entered the realm of Quantity, which was Being with all its content outside of itself. Whatever Quantity is, it is by virtue of outside force designating what it is. Quantity is open to mere quantitative change. Quantitative change is change imposed from the outside. The very quality of Quantum was that it was indifferent to change imposed upon it from the outside. Qualitative change is self-imposed change from the inside. We will learn, however, that genuine qualitative change depends on quantitative change. Nature does make great leaps, but only after nature indifferently undergoes incremental quantitative change. (Carlson, 2003:2). 

Perhaps the most common illustration for the transition of quantitative change to the qualitative change within the measure although from the point of Understanding is how the liquid water gets colder due to outside force, indifferently stays liquid, but, at 0E centigrade, liquid, radically and all at once, becomes a solid. (Carlson, 2003:3). Here, as Carlson suggests “Measure emerged in the Ratio of Powers (e.g., x2 = y), which showed itself to be "self-related externality." (327). Here by "ratio" Hegel means any relation between two quanta, including xy, x2, or x/y. In x2 = y, the identity of the first (internal) x is determined by the second (external) x. Hence the first x is in the thrall of externality. Nevertheless, x = x, and so it is self-related, even while externally determined. As self-related, the Ratio of Powers (Measure) is "a sublated externality." (327) Under the law of sublation, externality is canceled and preserved. Hence, Measure "has within itself the difference from itself." (327). (Carlson, 2003:3). Quantitative difference appears when difference is simply external. Captured by Measure, this difference is a qualitative moment. The topological mode of this development of syllogism is presented in the act of relating, in the act of mutual reference, the homology between two different (indifferent to each other) realities. As John Burbidge remarks: “Measuring . . . introduces an explicit act of relating. It brings together two realities, indifferent to each other… Since mutual reference is now an inherent characteristic of the concept, one passes beyond simple immediacy.  (Burbridge, 1981: 63) In his book on chemistry, Burbidge remarks that: "Measuring uses a quantity to specify a quality. That definition sets the logical task.”  (Burbridge, 1996: 53) Carlson remarks that “this formulation threatens to obscure the fact that, for Hegel, a Measure's quality is its quantity-accurate reportage of what the thing is.” (Carlson, 2003:4, endnote 14).

1.2.	Qualitative quantity in Hegel’s “The Science of Logic” (Wissenschaft der Logik), referred to as the Greater Logic

The notion of Qualitative quantity appears in Hegel’s early work “The Science of Logic” /The Greater Logic (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.)

In the first chapter, the “Specific Quantity”, § 711 – “Qualitative quantity in the first place an immediate, specific quantum.”, also in § 731, § 774 /in “Nodal Line of Measure Relations” /B/ in Chapter 2 /”Real Measure”/. The specific notion of the “qualitative quantity” Hegel explores in the Second Chapter “Real Measure” - “The Relation of Self-Substistent Measures” /A/ in “Combination of Two Measures” /a/, in “Measure of a series of Measure Relations” /b/, and in “Elective Affinity” /c/. The notion of “qualitative quantity” is the reason for Hegel to quote Carl Linnaeus’s “Nature Does Not Make Leaps”/ § 774/. 

In the first chapter, the ―Specific Quantity, in § 711 (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.), Hegel states that “Qualitative quantity in the first place an immediate, specific quantum.” And then continues “Secondly, this quantum as relating itself to another becomes a quantitative specifying, a sublating of the indifferent quantum. This measure is so far a rule and contains the two moments of measure distinguished; namely, the intrinsic quantitative determinateness and the external quantum. In this distinction, however, these two sides become qualities and the rule becomes a relation between them; consequently measure exhibits itself thirdly, as a relation of qualities. These at first have a single measure, but this is further specified within itself into distinct measures.” (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.)

In § 731, Hegel concludes that “Measure is thus the immanent quantitative relationship of two qualities to each other.” (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.)  Hegel‘s examinination of the Relation of the two Sides as Qualities, in § 731, goes as follow: 

“The qualitative, intrinsically determinate side of the quantum exists only as a relation to the externally quantitative side; as a specifying of the latter it is a sublating of its externality through which quantum as such is. This qualitative side thus has a quantum for its presupposition and its starting point. But this quantum is also qualitatively distinguished from the quality itself; this difference between them is now to be posited in the immediacy of being as such, in which determination measure still is. The two sides are thus qualitatively related and each is on its own account a qualitative determinate being; and the one quantum which at first was only a formal quantum indeterminate in itself, is the quantum of a something and of its quality, and also — now that the connection between them is determined as a measure — the specific magnitude of these qualities. These qualities are related to each other according to their determination as measures which determination is their exponent. But they are already implicitly related to each other in the being-for-self of measure; the quantum in its dual character is both external and specific so that each of the distinct quantities possesses this twofold determination and is at the same time inseparably linked with the other; it is in this way alone that the qualities are determined. They are therefore not only simply determinate beings existing for each other but they are posited as inseparable and the specific magnitude connected with them is a qualitative unity — a single determination of measure in which, in accordance with their Notion, they are implicitly bound up with each other. Measure is thus the immanent quantitative relationship of two qualities to each other.” (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.)

The specific notion and role of the “Qualitative quantity” Hegel explores in the Second Chapter “Real Measure” –“The Relation of Self-Substistent Measures” /A/ in “Combination of Two Measures” /a/, in “Measure of a series of Measure Relations” /b/, and in “Elective Affinity” /c/. The notion of “Qualitative quantity” is the reason for Hegel‘s famous quote “Nature Does Not Make Leaps” ( § 774) in “Nodal Line of Measure Relations” /B/ in Chapter 2 (“Real Measure”). (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.)

In § 774, Hegel explains that: 

“The system of natural numbers already shows a nodal line of qualitative moments which emerge in a merely external succession. It is on the one hand a merely quantitative progress and regress, a perpetual adding or subtracting, so that each number has the same arithmetical relation to the one before it and after it, as these have to their predecessors and successors, and so on. But the numbers so formed also have a specific relation to other numbers preceding and following them, being either an integral multiple of one of them or else a power or a root. In the musical scale which is built up on quantitative differences, a quantum gives rise to an harmonious relation without its own relation to those on either side of it in the scale differing from the relation between these again and their predecessors and successors. While successive notes seem to be at an ever-increasing distance from the keynote, or numbers in succeeding each other arithmetically seem only to become other numbers, the fact is that there suddenly emerges a return, a surprising accord, of which no hint was given by the quality of what immediately preceded it, but which appears as an actio in distans, as a connection with something far removed. There is a sudden interruption of the succession of merely indifferent relations which do not alter the preceding specific reality or do not even form any such, and although the succession is continued quantitatively in the same manner, a specific relation breaks in per saltum.” (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. 

Emphasizing the transformation of quality to quality by leaps “per saltum” in the “nodal Line of Measure Relations” (§ 777), Hegel defines “the attempt to explain coming-to-be or ceasing-to-be on the basis of gradualness of the alteration” as “tedious like any tautology”. (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.) And again, very next in the text Hegel defines as tautology the attempted explanation of the gradual notion (the “gradualness”): “what comes to be or ceases to be is assumed as already complete and in existence beforehand and the alteration is turned into a mere change of an external difference, with the result that the explanation is in fact a mere tautology.” (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.) Hegel warns about “the intellectual difficulty” for the “attendant on such an attempted explanation comes from the qualitative transition from something into its other in general, and then into its opposite; but the identity and the alteration are misrepresented as the indifferent, external determinations of the quantitative sphere.” (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.)

Hans-George Gadamer in his essay “The Idea of Hegel’s Logic”  , discusses the logical instinct of language in Hegel’s Logic and the notion of Hegel’s of “speculative logic” and “speculative statement” that goes beyond Kantian transcendental analytics and the formal logic.  Gadamer remind us that our human nature is so much determined by finitude that the phenomenon of language and the thinking wherein we seek to get hold of it must always be viewed as governed by the law of human finitude. For Gadamer, Hegel’s “speculative statement” is not so much a statement as it is language. Gadamer states that the speculative statement maintains the mean between the extremes of tautology on the one hand and self-cancellation in the infinite determination of its meaning on the other.

In his “Hegel’s Dialectic” /1976/ , Gadamer asserts that Hegel’s approach to logic and indeed his whole style of writing is ‘‘tautological’’. In the essay “Hegel and the Dialectic of the Ancient Philosophers”   in his “Hegel's Dialectic”, Gadamer maintains that a philosophical statement is very different from ordinary empirical statements. In the empirical statements, the predicate always leads us to ‘‘something new or different’’, but in a philosophical statement, the predicate always leads us back to a deeper reflection of the subject itself, such that ‘‘to ordinary ‘representative’ thinking a philosophical statement is always something like a tautology; the philosophical statement expresses an identity’’.

In contemporary philosophical research the creative power of tautology was definitely recognized.    
Hegel’s emphasis on the leap and nodal line in the relationship of qualitative and quantitative and the reason to set in brakets the Carl Linnaeus aphorism “Nature Does Not Make Leaps” /natura non facit saltus/, comes from the point of observeability and perceptability. This consideration is clear in Hegel:

“In thinking about the gradualness of the coming-to-be of something, it is ordinarily assumed that what comes to be is already sensibly or actually in existence; it is not yet perceptible only because of its smallness. Similarly with the gradual disappearance of something, the non-being or other which takes its place is likewise assumed to be really there, only not observable, and there, too, not in the sense of being implicitly or ideally contained in the first something, but really there, only not observable.” /§ 777/. (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.)

Hegel’s discussion of measure is presented as the third part of the Logic of Being, in three chapters. The first presents “Specific Quantity”, the next offers “Real Measure”, and the third delineates “The Becoming of Essence”. Measure follows from quality and quantity because it involves determinacy that is both qualitative and quantitative. Measure is an immediate unity of quality and quantity. It is qualitatively specific quantum, where quantity is bound with quality without further qualification.

The term “Specific quantity” presents the qualitative quantum as it is immediately given. By contrast, “real measure” involves “The Relation of Self-Subsistent Measures,” and these relations will take various forms.  

About “real measure”, the emphasis is on measure that is determinate, whereas specific quantity merely compromises measure per se. Just determinacy as such becomes a determinate determinacy in the contrast of something and other, so measure becomes real in relations between measures, relations between specific qualitative quanta. 

Topological notions here are presented with the emphasis on the “relations” and “between” measures, “relations between specific qualitative quanta” due to the fact that the main concern of “topology” are such notions as “relationships” and “between-ness”, thus we can suggests the term ‘topological notion of Qualitative quantity/ Specific quantity/ Qualitative quantum . 

There are topological characters in the situation of the Specific quantum (Qualitative quantity) that contains both quality and quantity. Although quality and quantity are immediately united in Specific quantum (Qualitative quantity), they are also distinguishable. In topological transformation, the two different geometrical figures (such as circle and square) can be transformed gradually one into another (without cutting) and the two will be united due to the homology yet these two are still distinguishable. The duality of homeomorphic transformation is presented in the Hegel’s notion of Specific quantum (Qualitative quantity). Due to this distinguishability between quality and quantity in the Specific quantum, “the specific quantum presents a duality that presents a quandary to those who are baffled by whether the removal of one hair makes one bald or whether the removal of a single grain of sand from the heap makes it cease to be heap.” 

The duality yet the distinguishability between quality and quantity in the Specific quantum and the conjunction of these two sides is exhibited in the examples given by Hegel, the paradoxes of the Heap and the Bald, where the nodal alteration in these examples is bond up with the very character of measure, due to the Vague nature of quantity and quality. As Winfield asserts, “there is an aspect of indifference that cannot be completely eliminated, but on the other hand, there is a limit in measure, where something at a certain point will lose its quality, seasing to be what it is when a certain quantitative threshold is reached.”  Once the measure relationship applies to quantities and presents a rule for them, a specific quantum can serve as a standard for measuring other things, whose quantities have a qualitative side different from that of their standard of measure. We end up with relations between different measures. . .  If you keep on plucking your hair, you will eventually become bald, just as if you remove one grain of sand after another from a pile, you will finally have nothing left. Yet in both cases of the head of hair and the heap of sand, the qualitatively defining quantity is indefinite. 

This problem arises from the two sides of measure. With measure, we are dealing with quantity that is no longer indifferent to quality, but has quality associated with it, and with a quality that depends upon quantity for its qualitative character. One commonly speaks about something gradually altering its quality through a gradual increase or decrease in some quantitative dimension. This construal focuses purely on the quantitative dimension, yet qualitative change is not just quantitative. It is something different.  

When water freezes, the qualitative change does not happen gradually. It  It happens all at once. There is a sudden transformation. There is a nodal alteration as the degree of temperature changes. This nodal transformation is build into measure. Hegel points out, given that measure involves an immediate conjunction of quantity and quality. On the one hand, because quantity is continuous, it points beyond itself and is subject to alteration. There is always a quantity beyond it with which it is continuous. On the other hand, measure imposes some limit to how much the specific quantum can undergo an increase or decrease without altering its quality. At some point there is a limit.  

Measure has generated a process into which measure has absorbed itself, a process in which measures cancel themselves, moving beyond themselves only to return to measure, letting thir own vanishing vanish. This process contains the determinations of quality, quantity, and measure as mere states of itself, states mediated by this encompassing process. Why would this provide closure for the Logic of Being, and take us to something in this categorical arena? How are we now contending with what is no longer characterizable simply qualitatively or simply quantitatively or as a qualitative quantity? Why do we have something that requires new categories to be or be thought?  

The emergent process cannot be reducible to any of the terms it contains precisely because it contains them all with further qualification. You cannot use categories of quality, quantity, or measure to categorize what involves them all in an additional relationship, a relationship that takes the totality of their relations and renders them internal differentiations of something that robs them of their immediacy by being their underlying mediation.

What we have is both their determinations and that which generates them withut having any further character. Hegel points out that this is precisely what essence has always been understood to be (p.379). Traditionally, essence is construed as what underlies being. You arrive at the essence of being by somehow getting at what being really rests upon. Being has an essence insofar as it is mediated by something else, without which it cannot be.

Typically, Hegel observes in introducing essence, when we knowing seeks the truth of being beyond, what is  immediately given, it attempts to penetrate being by going behind it to its determining source. It is understood that underlying being is something else on which it depends. Cognition here presumes that being has a ground, that it has a foundation, that there is a privileged essence mediating what appears to be. Essence is here treated as what is ultimate, and if essence is what is ultimate, being is just an appearance of essence, something whose presence is really not immediate, because it is grounded on something else. Being’s immediacy is illusory.  

It looks like Hegel’s emphasis on the leap and quality (that breaks in) per saltum is considerd with our human ability to percept and observe easy qualitative difference of something apparent, that lack “smallness” – large enough to be noticed, something visible and observable. It seems that qualitative quantity is ignored because of its notion of gradualness and lack of ability to leap as quality per saltum. Emphasizing the transformation of quality to quality by leaps “per saltum” in the “nodal Line of Measure Relations,” in § 777 Hegel defines “the attempt to explain coming-to-be or ceasing-to-be on the basis of gradualness of the alteration” as “tedious like any tautology.” 

Hiding the qualitative quantity behind the curtains of “tautology,” (Hegel, G.W.F. 1812, 1813, 1816. tr. /1969. Miller, A. V., foreword by Findlay J. N.) in his liturgy of quality per saltum, Hegel is “misleading” the philosophers following him, especially the dialectical materialism of Engels and Marx, who created the cliché of the dialectical law of transition of quantity into quality and visa versa. Dialectical materialism is dialectic per saltum, dialectic concerned only with…and by a leap, by fits and starts. The concern of dialectics per saltum is the leap and revolution and there is not place for the intermediation of the “Qualitative quantity.”

Peter Caws in his study Yorick’s World: Science and the knowing subject (1993), provides an intriguing discussion on the dialectical law of the passage of quantity into quality, emphasizing indeed on these small changes that are ‘not yet perceptible only because of its smallness’ (Hegel). The subchapter of the book is entitled by Caws ‘Notable and Just Noticeable Differences’. (Caws, P. 1993:248-249) Caws employ the notion of ‘concomitant change’, after Mill’s phrase "concomitant variation".  

For Caws “the idea of concomitant change ("concomitant variation," to use Mill's phrase) is basic to the scientific enterprise: we want to know, if we make some change in the world, what else will also change, so that we can achieve or avoid it.” (Caws, P. 1993:248-249). According to Caws, “changes can be large or small, dramatic or marginal and group sizes change by the addition or subtraction of members, other properties by augmentation or diminution, intensification or dilution, etc., or by outright metamorphosis, one property being replaced by another. Cumulative marginal changes, each of which is hardly noticed, may eventually result in states so altered that they require altogether different descriptions. But this phenomenon is context-dependent and works on both sides of the qualitative-quantitative boundary. If a large surface, a wall for example, has always been red, but suddenly overnight is painted yellow, the change is startlingly obvious, but if its red color is modified very slowly, through an imperceptible shift in the direction of orange and progressively through lighter and lighter shades, until finally the last trace of red has vanished and the wall is pure yellow, the fact that it has changed at all may dawn only slowly, and then only on an observant witness with a good memory (imagine the change stretched out over centuries, so that in any one witness's life it was just an orange wall). Psychologists speak of "jnd's" or "just noticeable differences" as a measure of the refinement of perception (similar to "resolving power" in optics), a threshold below which changes cannot be perceived, so that several subliminal moves may be possible before anything is noticed—and indeed if they are made at suitable intervals nothing may ever be noticed.” (Caws, P. 1993:248-249)

As Caws states “something very similar happens on the quantitative side if the sets in question are sufficiently large. If one person is in a room and another enters, the change is obvious enough, and similarly if a third joins a couple, but if forty people are watching a parade, let us say, the arrival of the forty-first may go entirely unremarked. Still if people keep coming, one by one, sooner or later we have a huge crowd, a demonstration, a triumph—and when exactly did this happen? “(Caws, P. 1993:249) Here Caws recalls the ancient paradox of The Heap, where a grain of wheat is set down, then another grain, and so on; eventually there is a heap, but which grain was it that turned a scattering of grain into a heap. Caws highlights the fact that “this paradox was presumably intended to remain paradoxical—no empirical research was done, as far as I know, to find out when impartial observers would start to use the term "heap" without prompting. (My guess is that four grains, in a tight tetrahedral array, would qualify as a very small heap, whereas if the procedure were to scatter randomly over a given area, say a square yard, there would be a range of many thousands of grains over which the status of the accumulation as a heap could be disputed.) The point the paradox makes is that categoreal boundaries, for example, between "scattering" and "heap," are fuzzy, but that surely comes as no surprise and hardly makes a very convincing foundation for philosophical doctrine, whether metaphysical or revolutionary.” (Caws, P. 1993:249)

Most of the Zeno’s paradoxes (the dichotomy paradoxes) exhibit the notion of gradualness of ‘qualitative quantity’ transformation dealing with counterintuitive aspects of continuous space and time.

There are cases, concludes Caws, in which “cumulative imperceptible changes in x lead to the emergence of y , and there are cases in which they just lead to more x —and either x or y can be indifferently qualitative or quantitative predicates; everything depends on the particular case, and can only be learned by looking. Adding atom after atom to a lump of uranium 235 eventually produces an atomic explosion and an assortment of vaporized fission products; adding atom after atom to a lump of gold just produces a bigger lump of gold. Water when refrigerated changes into ice; iron when refrigerated gets colder but doesn't change into another form.” (Caws, P. 1993:250)

Caws is radical in his conclusion that “the dialectical law of the passage of quantity into quality, like its companions, the law of the interpenetration of opposites and the law of the negation of the negation, is thus seen to be an entertaining but nonessential red herring.” (Caws, P. 1993:250) 

In contemporary philosophy and science thinking about the notion of gradualness and the significance of the ‘small changes’, which are ‘not yet perceptible only because of its smallness’ (Hegel), thinking about the ‘notable’ and ‘just noticeable’ differences, one shall recal the Lorenz and Poincare’s discovery that small changes in initial conditions of the system can lead to larger changes (classic example of The Chaos Theory).

From his reading of Hegel, Frederick Engels elucidated in in his work, commonly known as the "Anti-Duhring" and “Dialectic of Nature” the three laws of dialectics utilized by Marx. The second law of dialectics, the law of transformation and the passage of quantitative changes into qualitative changes is based on Hegel’s discussion of "nodal lines" in nature, where the nodes are qualitative shifts accomplished by the incremental quantitative changes. Such a shifts are  seen as "a sudden revulsion of quantity into quality", based on Hegel’s example about "the qualitatively different states of aggregation water exhibits under increase or diminution of temperature." (G. W. F. Hegel, Hegel's Logic, Being Part I of the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences ([1830] translated by William Wallace) (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975), 160.

Engels cites this as "one of the best-known examples—that of the change of the state of water, which under normal atmospheric pressure changes at 0°C from the liquid into the solid state, and at 100°C from the liquid into the gaseous state, so that at both these turning-points the merely quantitative change of temperature brings about a qualitative change in the condition of the water." (Engels, F. 1939:138) 

Peter Caws in his study Yorick’s World: Science and the knowing subject (1993) and Reform and Revolution (1972) provide stong arguments challenging the explanation and example of Engels. (Caws, P. 1993:246-247) (Caws, P. 1972:78) 

Caws state that the example with boiling/freezing water is ‘highly misleading’ and ‘it gives the impression that temperature is a property of water that is causally related to its state: change the (quantitative) temperature, and the (qualitative) state will change.” According to Caws, “the fact is that at the boiling and freezing points the temperature can't be changed until the state has changed.What happens is this (I will take the case of boiling, which applies mutatis mutandis to freezing also): steadily supplying enough heat energy to water will raise its temperature to 100°C; at this point supplying further energy will not change the temperature but will dissociate the molecules from one another so that they become steam at 100°C; when all the water has been changed to steam then, assuming a closed system, the supply of still further energy will raise the temperature of the steam above 100°C. But if the process begins at room temperature it will take about seven times as long to change all the water into steam as it took to raise the water to the boiling point.” (Caws, P. 1993:246-247)

Caws conclude that “there are two things wrong with the Hegel-Engels account: first, it isn't changing the temperature that changes the state, and second, the change is not sudden. As I have pointed out elsewhere, (Caws, P. 1972:78) when water boils because it is heated from the bottom, the change of a small amount of it into steam makes dramatic bubbles, and this is not a bad analogy for repressed change, which was one of the popular senses in which the dialectical principle of quantity and quality came to be understood: history will accumulate exploitation and repression incrementally, until crisis and revolution suddenly ensue. And this may indeed happen—only the quantity/quality distinction has nothing to do with it. Water froze and boiled long before temperatures were thought of, and when we talk about "the boiling point" and attach a number to it (note by the way that it is impossible to measure the boiling point at standard atmospheric pressure in degrees Celsius, since 100°C is defined as the boiling point of water at standard atmospheric pressure), the number by itself does not refer to anything that is true of the water, but (as before) only to the cardinality of a collection of units.” (Caws, P. 1993:247)

Caws goos on asserting that “One of the remarkable and useful features of the exact sciences is that quantities can be measured and the measurements plugged into computations. The qualities whose degrees are attended to in the process of measurement (or predicted by the outcome of the computation) are sometimes thought to enter into the computations. Thus in the most elementary case of a freely falling body initially at rest we have the equation:

  which means "the distance fallen is equal to half the acceleration of gravity multiplied by the square of the time elapsed." But a moment's thought will show that this can't possibly be what is meant: times can't be squared; only numbers can. Nothing can be multiplied by an acceleration. The expression is only a shorthand way of saying that measurements of the distance, the acceleration, and the time, using compatible units, will yield numbers that stand in the required arithmetical relation. In the algebraic expression given above s isn't a distance at all, it's a variable that can take numerical values, and so for the other elements.” (Caws, P. 1993:247-248)

Engels’s law of transformation and the passage of quantitative changes into qualitative changes, as all of the three laws of Engels’s dialectics become cliché in the mode of thinking of quality and quantity. The three laws of dialectics are not only oversimplified, but also misleading at best, establishing something quite self-evident, trivial and common. Gradualness and gradual changes are assumed as not leading to turning points, where one force overcomes the other and quantitative change appears in the new measure. Due to this assumption, the notion of Qualitative quantity in Hegel’s dialectics, remained inapparent. 

1.7.	Topological Fourfold of infinities within Hegel’s philosophical development of the concepts of space, time, matter and aether 

Hegel’s categories of quality and quantity, in particular qualitative quantity in relation with his concepts of space and time, is subject to which much attention has not been paid by Hegel’s expositors and commentators and yet the importance of it cannot be denied. (Haldar, 1932).  

As Hiralal Haldar asserts, “Time and space are not among the categories of Hegel. They are not discussed under the names in his logic, but as regarded of though very meagerly and obscurely in his Philosophy of Nature.”  (Haldar, 1932:520).  But there is nothing in the phenomena of nature of which the ground plan, the basis, is not to be found in the forms of thoughts or the categories. (Haldar, 1932:520). If space and time belong to nature, if they are the necessary aspect under which the objects of perception are always presented, they must have their logical grounds. What are these categories? This is the important question which need consideration. (Haldar, 1932:520). 

Hegel’s philosophy of space and time is presented in his Philosophy of Nature   (Miller tr. Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature 1970), and in Wissenschaft der Logik (the Greater Logic), and in his early treatment of geometry, his Geometrische Studien,   This early work of Hegel contains fragents of what remains of a more extensive work on geometry which Hegel wrote in his Jena years. Hegel arrived at the University of Jena in the year 1801, and left the university and the town in the year 1807. During those few years in Jena, Hegel worked on the manuscripts and drafts of his later 'system' which was published in a considerably revised form only after Hegel had left the town. For this reason Gruner and Bartelmann call Hegel's time in Jena his 'proto-systematic' phase.    (Gruner and Bartelmann, 2015: 44). 
Hegel's nature-philosophical speculations bears continuous relevance for our 21st century. As Manfred Gies wrote Hegel, in his thoughts about the notions of 'space', 'time', and 'matter', had reached insights which touch precisely those points at which the discipline of physics possibly reaches its own methodological barriers  (Gies, 1983: 51). 

In the logic of Wissenschaft der Logik (the Greater Logic), the moments of the concept of quantity are continuity and discreteness, and Hegel argues that these two moments equally imply the other, so that neither can be considered in complete isolation, but  “slides over” to the other. (This, for Hegel, is the explanation of Kant’s second cosmological antinomy.) (Paterson 2006:4) 

In Philosophy of Nature, Hegel's account of space and time is initial and completely abstract. Hegel introduces a self-externality of space, a very limited form of space, in particular, not yet developed enough for geometrical thought. (Paterson 2006:4) Here Hegel presents only the continuity level. Hegel names this a “perfect continuity”. (Miller tr. Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature 1970:29). For Hegel, the space is ``pure self-externality’’ and what is external to itself is always pointing away to what it is not, a defiance of any fixity, and this is (at least initially) our idea of continuity. (Paterson 2006:4)

Intuitively, a continuous function has no ``jumps'' in its graph, for running into one would “stop”' it and not point anywhere outside itself. Since we have only pure continuity at this stage, the science of space, geometry, cannot start: for there are no points – a point is an interruption of the continuity of space (Philosophy of Nature, p.29). (Paterson 2006:4/5)

Points, we may say, form the discrete side of space. More generally, for geometry to start, we need to have points, lines and planes. This comes about through the logic of the concept as described in Wissenschaft der Logik (the Greater Logic). (Paterson 2006:4/5)

As Paterson states “There, the two moments of quantity, continuity and discreteness, do not conceptually ``live'' in isolation but the presence of each implies the presence of the other. We can see that even in the modern mathematical definition of continuity: continuity in mathematics is continuity at every point, and with the mention of the point, discreteness enters. More precisely, and as explained in Wissenschaft der Logik (the Greater Logic: p.200f ), each form of magnitude, continuity and discreteness, contains that other and that ``the distinction between them consists only in this, that in one of the moments the determinateness is posited, and in the other, it is only implicit’’. Further, in terms of the unit (one), the two moments ``possess the absolute possibility that one may be posited in them at any point’’. In other words, . . .  continuity is continuity at a point (as a one) while conversely, discreteness taken as concept is the continuity of its ones. Ultimately, this is based on Being-for-self (Fürsichsein) in the relation of the one and the many, in which one gives rise to continuity, and many to discreteness, but each of the one and the many refers to the other, though in any particular situation, we may choose not to make this reference-to-each implicit.” (Paterson 2006:4/5)

For Paterson, “with discreteness made explicit in space as a many of points, (a potential infinite), Hegel’s theory – a development of the Pythagorean view of point, line, plane and space – then gives the basis for Euclidean geometry. We can briefly motivate this development as follows. We start off, as discused above, with the (immediate) concept of space as continuity, a ``flowing’’. This, made more precise – again as we have seen - makes explicit the moment of discreteness through the positing of the point at which the continuity is located. But the point is, as Euclid says, ``that which has no part’’. How can you have a spatial object that has no extension? To clarify this, on Hegelian grounds, the point is contradictory in character simply because it is discreteness in isolation and so is implicitly continuity as well. So our problem with the point and its lack of extension is due to us holding in our minds the point in separation on its own, suppressing its intrinsic conceptual shift bringing out its continuity. The continuity of space was its self-externality. This self-externality is determined further in the continuity of the discrete moment of space, viz. the point. The continuity of the point is its existing ``outside itself’’ , which is, for Hegel, realized as the line, paradigmatically the straight line.” (Paterson 2006:5) 

Hegel points out  that curved lines presuppose two (and, we may say, even three) dimensions and therefore come after the determination of the surface. Surely Hegel’s account of (a closed) surface as determining three dimensional space by its bounding such a region is open to the same kind of objection, viz. that for a surface to bound such a region it already presupposes three dimensional space so that one cannot derive the latter from the former. 

Hegel’s account in Philosophy of Nature  of how the surface gives rise to three dimensional space differs from that in his Geometrical Studies.  In the latter (influenced by Aristotle), the point, line and surface are limits but the three dimensional body is not limit.) (Paterson 2006:5)

Paterson asserts that “this is realized in classical physics in the motion of a point mass which traces out a curve (a line).” (Paterson 2006:5) For Paterson, “Hegel then argues dialectically that space is mediated through its first negation as this straight line, its second negation being the plane. Obtaining the plane from the ``line through point'' can be thought of physically by obtaining the plane as swept out by a line rotating about a point on it (like a propellor blade in motion). However, the plane in two dimensions corresponds to the straight line in one dimension. More generally, and corresponding to a curved line, the negation of the line is the (curved) surface. We can think of this as swept out by a rotating curved line. For example, a circle rotated about a diameter gives a (hollow) sphere. (Paterson 2006:5)

For Paterson, “On philosophical grounds (for Hegel) the surface is then the negation of the negation of space and so is space mediated. But the surface is two dimensional and so is not, as we would expect, full three dimensional space. Hegel points out, however, that if we take a closed surface, e.g. a (hollow) sphere, it is the limit of its interior, i.e. of a full spatial region. And it is in this respect, that the surface is the ``restoration of the spatial totality’’. 

In this way, then, the point, the line and the plane (surface) are set up as the primary concepts required for Euclidean geometry. Of course, many other concepts, axioms and postulates are also required and Hegel discusses these in some detail in Wissenschaft der Logik (the Greater Logic and Geometrical Studies  though not so much in Philosophy of Nature. (Paterson 2006:6)

Time, Hegel says, is ``the negative unity of self-externality’’ . Now on the other hand, space, for Hegel, is ``the abstract universality of Nature’s self-externality’’ ; it follows that time is the ``negative unity of space’’ (at least at the universal level). But we have already seen the negativity of space in the point-line-surface-space (three dimensional) development - for example, in space as a ``perpetual becoming other’’. So in what respect does time as the negative unity of space differ from the negativity of the geometric development described above? This is explained by Hegel in terms reminiscent of the transition from Quality to Being-for-self (Fürsichsein) in Wissenschaft der Logik (the Greater Logic), although here, the transition is from Quantity (with its indifference) to Being-for-self. 

In this latter transition (which is time), Hegel points out that the negativity of space ``is equally for itself’’. In contrast, the point-line-surface-space negativity is not for itself, but rather the expression of the negativity working through spatiality ``behind the scenes’’ as it were.

Another way to express the difference between the negative unity of space (as geometrical) and time is that in the former , negativity takes the form of space falling apart ``into indifferent subsistence’’ while still being space as a whole, but in the case of time, negativity is sublated in existence, existence that is no longer indifferent but is difference that has ``stepped out of space’’. So we may say, space falls apart into the point which sublates itself consecutively in line, surface and then space reconstituted as its original totality, space, as it were, parting and reforming, the divisions articulating the negativity being just as easily erased, i.e. they are indifferent, and can just as much be explicitly present as blanketed out, i.e. their fundamental incompatibility is not allowed to stand out permanently. This process of spatial negativity, however, stands out on its own in time as existing, so that spatial differences, which in the negative unity of space on its own, are internal and indifferent, are now determined as external, out there, not emerging only to disappear again. The point , that was only a ``possibility’’ for geometry, and is posited only as ``the being-forself’’, ``the negation of space, a negation that is posited in space’’ is now, through time, existing. Put yet another way, the point in geometry is only ideal and, but in time, it becomes real. For Hegel, ``the point ... developed for itself is time’’ . (Paterson 2006:6:7)

The role of time, in Hegel, is to make space real in Euclidean geometry Itself. The geometrical figure, though ideal, becomes real, assumes drawn form, through the constancy of the figure in time. (Paterson 2006:7)

In Hegel's dialectic of space, the point’s sublation in the line achieves reality in the drawing of a line through a point in time, and the line’s sublation in the plane achieves reality through the sweeping out of a plane by the rotation of a line about a point on the line in time. (Paterson 2006:7)

Paterson asserts that time as giving reality to space is easy to illustrate in our subjective experience with the example, when we ``lose track of time’’, e.g. in listening to music, spatial difference is smothered in constancy, receding into implicitness. This is the first form of negativity. When we ``wake up’’ and look around the room, spatial difference is made explicit and real through the temporal process – looking around, moving our eyes. While this example of the two kinds of negativity comes from our experience in the world, Hegel, I think, would have argued that the two kinds are observer-independent, intrinsic to the concepts of space and time. (Paterson 2006:7)

For Paterson, “since time is the Fürsichsein of space, the positing of the negation of space as for itself, external, the moments of this negativity are now explicitly posited. 

In Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature, time is a becoming – the becoming present in space – and according to the logic  (Wissenschaft der Logik), becoming is the passing of being into nothing and its reverse. 

In this context, the passing of being into nothing is the past and of nothing into being is the future. The Now is the ``immediate vanishing of these differences into singularity’’, is the present. The three moments of time, namely, past, present and future, are because of the loss of indifference of spacein the transition from space to time. The three moments not realized in existence, posited out there in front of us for inspection: the closest that one can come to the awareness of the moments is in reflection on one’s own experience: past, present and future are, for Hegel, ``only in subjective imagination, in remembrance and fear and hope’’. (These themes are developed existentially much later by Heidegger in Being and Time.) (Paterson 2006:7) 

Space first expresses its negativity in point, line and plane, and time expresses its negativity in the Now, the present as the transition from past to future.

The three moments of space give rise to the three dimensions and relate to the science of geometry. Yet, this is not the case for time. (Paterson 2006:7)

Paterson asserts that “the reason for this is that time does not have the ``indifference of self-externality’’ that space had. It is this indifference which allows spatial elements to exist in harmony side by side in geometric ``configurations’’ such as triangles and cubes, with their points, lines and planes. Since time is the positing of the negativity of space, its determinations are no longer those of indifference, but its constancy lies in is its shifting which only is when it is not. There are no temporal triangles. For a constant determination for time, one has to fall back on the most abstract, paralyzation of thought, and this is the One. This, Hegel says, is  the ``uttermost externality of thought’’ completely difference-less, which is manipulated purely externally in time as arithmetic, the practical mathematics of number.  (Paterson 2006:7)

Hegel understands Kant’s formulation of geometry as derived from space as the form of pure intuition and arithmetic as the form of inner intuition. 

The study of time in Physics involves also a continuum and the Calculus, and the study of number in mathematics goes far beyond arithmetical computation, involving profound theorems such as the prime number theorem. (Paterson 2006:8)

Regrettably, Hegel does not discuss these here, and, as developed in greater detail in Wissenschaft der Logik, one is left with the impression that for Hegel, number is a purely mechanical affair (though the Concept ``explains’’ the various kinds of arithmetic process, addition, multiplication, powers and the like) though surely he must have been aware that arithmetic computation is the only the start of the mathematics of number.

From the concepts of space, time and place Hegel derive the concept of matter.  Hegel’s idea of matter emerging from space and time has apparently influenced Hermann Weyl (Weyl 1919) . 

As we have seen, space is self-externality in its ``asunderness and differenceless continuity’’ (Philosophy of Nature, p.40) whose negativity becomes for itself in time. So time arises as the explicit negativity of space, but conversely, ``time is the immediate collapse into indifference’’ and hence into space. Time is the negativity of space and ``the positive, i.e. the being of the differences of time, is space’’. Time is the spatial process posited and is only realized in space. Conversely, space in its intrinsic difference process is realized only when its truth is posited explicitly in time. In this way, as Hegel puts it, the negativity of space is time and the positivity of time is space. (The thinking involved here is a special case of the logic of positive and negative in the Essence of WL: there (SL, pp.424-427) the positive and the negative are ``the sides of the opposition that have become self-subsistent’’ and ``their positedness, or the reference-to-other in a unity which they are not themselves, is taken back into each’’. Hegel also stresses there that the positive and negative ``are at the same time in and for themselves positive and negative’’ [my translation]. (Paterson 2006:8) 

Space is the positive and time is the negative (the negativity of former), and space has three dimensions while time has none but rather is the transition of past and future through the now. On the other hand, in the logic of Wissenschaft der Logik (Wissenschaft der Logik, p.426) Hegel says that ``although one of the determinatenesses of positive and negative belongs to each side, they can be changed round, and each side is of such a kind that it can be taken equally well as positive as negative’’. But space and time (which, in the case we are examining, are the positive and negative) do not have this symmetry for Hegel. (In relativity theory, as we will see, there is also a symmetry between space and time (and as in the Hegelian view, a difference).)

The explanation for the apparent contradiction in Hegel's view of space and time - that while space and time are ``posited unequally'' yet the two sides can be ``changed round'' - is to be found in the selfexternality of Nature at the beginning, i.e. the initial presupposition or determination of Nature is what determines one as the positive and the other as the negative, the becoming, thus introducing the asymmetry between the two. (Paterson 2006:8)

Continuing with Hegel's treatment of space and time in Philosophy of Nature, their unity is that each is only in reference to the other, is in fact the truth of both. This truth, posited in space, realizes the point as Place. 

The full threedimensionality of space is present in Place and the latter is the point existing in its truth as universal: space is no longer a falling apart into discrete points but rather cohesively presented as the complete portion of space as temporally dependent. 

With Place, the point, instead of being the abstract point of geometry, is now ``concrete’’. The transition of time is present in Place through the indeterminacy of its boundary. 

For Hegel Place is the existence of the point as a universal, in its truth. In Place, both spatial and temporal determinations apply so that space and time are no longer separated.

According to Paterson, we have in Place, to use relativistic language, a ``space-time’’ event (interpreted non-technically.  Place is the unity of Here and Now. From Place, Hegel procedes to obtain the concept of Matter through motion. The argument goes as follows. We have said that Place is the truth of space and time. But, of course, in normal language, place does not have temporal connotations. If I visit you at your place, place here is thought of as time independent – it is the same place, yesterday, today or tomorrow. The temporal moment in Place has been negated in its spatiality, which Hegel defines   as ``indifferent, spatiality’’. (Philosophy of Nature, p.41)

Place shifts with the making of the temporal Now explicit in Place. Here we could recall the previous discussion about ‘point’ above, where the point established itself in its self-externality as the line. This establishment of the point as the line was purely abstract and Geometrical, not primarily temporal in nature. At the present stage Hegel presents a more concrete determination of Place, it is determined as this place (the Now). Place here is self-external, a spatial Place. It is another place. In this transition, time is posited, made explicit. This positing of time in place is the Motion. According to Paterson, with this positing of time in place, Hegel rejects the Pythagorean account of line as the motion of a point. For Hegel motion comes later in the concrete setting of Place.  For Paterson, Hegel’s understanding of motion is just the making explicit of the shifting of the boundaries of Place as discussed above. Hegel's treatment of the unity of Place in movement from one place to another, or ``the immediately identical and existent unity of both’’ is the matter. The conclusion that follows is that space and time are intrinsic to matter, and matter is the expression of concrete existence of space and time in their unity.

Hegel explains mechanics in which matter has mass moving with a certain velocity by the spatio-temporal content of matter: velocity (distance=space over time) is intrinsic to matter just as much as is its mass, since matter is the concrete existence of space and time.

Matter, says Hegel in a Zusatz (Philosophy of Nature, p.44) ``is the relation of space and time as a peaceful identity’’. At this stage in PON, Hegel's discussion moves on to force and gravity.  

The reality of space-time becomes the being of time in space and the being of space in time, and the “real union” of the two is “the real infinity of the ether”, of absolute matter, which he terms motion.  (Cantillo, 2013:29)

Reviewing Hegel’s criticism of Newton’s system of worlds and examining critically the many aspects of it that seems to anticipate the approach to mathematical physics, associated today with Einstein, Henry Paolucci notes that Hegel’s criticism on Newton was well informed: 

„Through hundreds of well documented pages of both of his Science of Logic and Philosophy of Nature, Hegel develops the meaning of Newton’s fluxional calculus, his concepts of space, time, mass, inertial, centripetal and centrifugal forces, his law of motion, his gravitational world system, and finally his theory of light and colors. Particularly under the heading of ‚Quality‘ and ‚Measure‘ in the Logic and ‚Mechanics‘ in the Philosophy of Nature, Newton’s doctrine provides mach of the empirical datum upon which the Hegelian philosophical dialectics operates.“ (Paolucci, 2001: 55)  

In the Lesser Science of Logic, Hegel does not explicitly discuss the Newtonian celestial mechanics. He does, however, discuss the logical presuppositions upon which any analysis of the law of phenomena into laws of forces (such as Newton framed out to be based, if it is to make philosophical sense. And this he does of considerable lenght under the subheadings „Repulion and Attraction“, „Quantity“, „Magnitude“, „Quantum“, „Number“, „Degree“, „Quantitative Ratio“, „Measure“, „Thing“, „Properties“, „Matter“, „Form“, „Phenomena“, „Forces“ – all of them terms we now familiarly encounter in contemporary treatises on post Plankian physical theory. (Paolucci, 2001: 55) 

In the Great Science of Logic, Hegel provides what amounts to a running comentary on the the terse paragraph of the Logic of the Enciclopedia, takes us to the philosophical core of Hegel’s criticism of the Newton’s celestial mechanics. No one pretending to access the adequacy of that criticism can afford to ignore, or skim over, what Hegel has to say about „Quantity“, „Quantum“, and „Quantitative Ratio“ in his book – lenght discussion of „Magnitude“, or about „Specific Quantity“, „Real Measure“, and the „Measureless“ (as transition to Essence) under the heading of „Measure“ . ..Under the ‚Magnitude‘ and ‚Measure‘, Hegel examines, among other things, the basic notion of the Newtonian-Leibnizian calculus of the mathematical infinite and infinitesimals upon which that calculus is build.  (Paolucci, 2001: 63) 

As Henry Paolucci notes, „Hegel considers of lenght the dificulties of assimilating analytical calculus to analytical geometry and applying both to the analysis of accelerated rectilinear and non-linear curvilinear motion, and anticipating things to come in our own time“. Hegel  speculates on the possibility of developing a mathematics of qualitative quanta which would be a science of measures competent to deal with the qualities as well as the quantities of existent things, remarks Paolucci, (as for instance, Einsteinian and Plankian physics now deals with qualitatively determined quanta, or measures, of spaces, time, light and a host of electro-magnetic phenomena). (Paolucci, 2001: 77)

Paolucci emphasizes on Hegel’s anticipation of the development of science done by Reimann and Einstein, „Anticipating the need for Reimann-Einsten advance, Hegel observes: „There is no science of time corresponding to the science of space, to geometry.“ (Paolucci, 2001: 77) Hegel observes that a science of measures, competent to deal with time in its negativity, as the moving point of space, „would be the most difficult of all sciences.“ (Paolucci, 2001: 77). For Hegel, a thing in „place“ is understood to be a thing in Space-time, here and now or there and then. .....Anticipating the language of Erns Mach, einstein and Plank, Hegel defines space and time as positive and negative determinations of Motion, which is Mass.  (Paolucci, 2001: 77)

Within Hegel’s concepts of logic, categories of quality and quantity, and the concepts of space and time are embedded in his vision for philosophical science as a circle of sciences articulating (what he called) the Concept (Begriff). In the usual order, one starts with logic, which is  ‘pure’ science, where qualitative and quantitative are developed, the logic then is realized in the externality of space and time in the philosophy of nature. This in turn leads to life and the philosophy of spirit, culminating in ‘absolute spirit’ in its forms of art, religion and philosophy. Logic itself, as Hegel says, begins with the qualitative, since it starts with being as ``abstractly first and immediate’’. It is this immediacy that gives to the start of logic that spontaneously given wholeness that is characteristic of the qualitative. This is reflected even in normal, non-Hegelian logic, where predicates (properties) are really the qualitative in the Hegelian sense. (Paterson 2006:4)

For Alan Paterson, the problem of the transition from logic to nature is also present in normal logic, in the relation between the intensive or qualitative (such as a property) and the extensive or quantitative (in the extension of a property). (Paterson 2006:4) If in the Wissenschaft der Logik Hegel starts with the qualitative, it is with the quantitative that Hegel resumes his philosophy of nature. In the logic, quantity is the disruption of quality in Fürsichsein, beingfor-self, with its combined moments of attraction and repulsion expressing the relation of the one and the many. In Wissenschaft der Logik 6, Hegel understands space, time in terms of the dynamics of the one and the many: these are ``expansions, pluralities that are a coming-out-ofself’’, ``a perennial self-production of their unity’’. Space is ``absolute self-externality’’, which is self-identical in its ``perpetual becoming other’’ while time is ``an absolute coming-out-ofitself’’, that generates the one in the form of ``a point of time, the now’’. 

With philosophy, the concept becomes ‘pure’ again and brings us back to the starting place of logic. Hegel’s circle of the transition from logic to nature, beginning from logic with qualitative and quantitative and moving to the nature where space and time have their proper treatment, has always been controversial. Yet, reality and thought are omnipresent throughout Hegelian philosophy. As Alan Paterson states “Any meaningful thought involves reality – it is true that there is probably not in existence a ``golden mountain’’ but there is in existence ``gold’’ and a ``mountain’’. In the logic, despite its ``purity’’, the world is implicit, and in nature the thought of the logic that structures it is implicit. One cannot treat thought and being separately, the one is only with the other. This is consistent with themes in present day philosophy of science, where observation is seen to be theory laden.” (Paterson 2006:3/4)

Indeed, we can take ``pure’’ logic to express the structure of the world implicitly, while the world (or nature) is just what logic is ultimately about. 

The transition from logic to nature in Hegel’s thought is then just the Being world that was implicit all along and through which the thought categories of the logic achieved their meaningfulness, the rock which assured the validity of that logic, emerging explicitly.  

Indeed, one can trace in the logical development of Wissenschaft der Logik a greater and greater sense of reality, from the abstraction of pure Being, through number and measure, then to the logic of judgement and syllogism, then to objects of science, then to life, then to the initial emergence of space in the logic of Euclidean geometry in cognition and finally in the Idea where nature at last emerges explicitly and pure logic recedes into implicitness in the philosophy of nature. (Paterson 2006:3)

In the explicitness of nature, the logical structure lies under the surface (which is ultimately why one needs experiment to tease that structure out into the open). This distance between the implicit logic and nature ‘out there’' appears most strikingly at the start of the Philosophy of Nature, with space and time, which for Hegel are ``selfexternality in its complete abstraction’’.  In Philosophy of Nature (p.28), self-externality assumes its positive form as space and its negative form as time. 

From § 10 of the Philosophical Encyclopaedia, which Hegel composed in Nürnberg (from 1808), in the context of his work as a Gymnasium teacher, it clearly emerges that “the three main parts” in which “science as a whole” may be divided – “logic”, the “science of nature” and the “science of the spirit” – reflect three modes of being of the “essence”, namely: “the logical element” (or “pure concept” and “abstract idea”), which is the “eternally simple essence [considered] in itself”; “nature”, which is “this essence externalised” (or “the reality of the idea” in the form of “exterior being-there”); and “the spirit”, which is the “return of the essence within itself from its externalisation” (or “the reality of the idea” in the form of “self-consciousness”).  (Cantillo, 2013:31)

Giuseppe Cantillo emphasizes on Hegel’s use of the term and notion of manifold in in his essay Differenzschrift (The Difference Between Fichte’s and Schelling’s System of Philosophy, 1801). Cantillo points out that “Hegel already explicitly noted this need for systematicity and cohesiveness at the beginning of his Jena period, in his Differenzschrift. Here he argues that because the relation of the limited to the absolute is manifold “philosophizing must aim to posit this manifold as internally connected, and there necessarily arises the need to produce a totality of knowledge, a system of science”.  The system is established neither through an analytical method, nor through a synthetical one; rather, it is founded on the “development of reason itself”; it is a “self-production of reason”, in which “the Absolute shaps itself into an objective totality, which is a whole in itself held fast and complete, […] an organisation of propositions and intuitions”   . (Cantillo, 2013:32) 

For Hegel, space emerges as the positive unity of mass, i.e. of inert matter, which nonetheless has within itself the memory – so to speak – of its own original unity with motion. This lends matter an inner animation in the form of the negative unity of the “absolute point”: 

For Hegel “mass is absolute unity equal to itself, in which negative unity subsists, the absolute point.”   The insertion of the “absolute point”, identified in the Dissertatio as the application of time to space, generates a multiplicity of points and limits, meaning that the mass, space/matter, divides itself into countless indivisible parts, or atoms. An infinite quantity (Menge) of quanta (Quanti) thereby emerges, which is to say of parts stemming from the negation of the universal mass. Each of them, as itself mass, contains its own centre (Mittelpunkt) within itself. While mutually distinct, quanta are all essentially the same: “one is a quantum as much another”.   In their self-equality and non-differentiation, they are inert, yet this inertia affects their very mutual independence and distinction; as the removal of their independence, it takes the form of gravity, which presents itself as the fall of a body with a rectilinear motion that finds its beginning and end, its starting point and point of arrival, in its opposite, namely rest. 

Hence the philosophy of nature distinguishes itself from the common way of envisaging nature, for it presents the latter as consisting “of wholes and parts in different quantities, and in a causal relation, as well as a quantity of ‘these’ [single, determined things]”. (Cantillo, 2013:45)

What Hegel says about the relationship between ‘wholes and parts’ and the ‘different quantities’ as well as a ‘quantity of these’ single determined things, is truly topological in character. Topological notions of whole and parts relation, manifold, and different quantities, are set by Hegel in relation with space and time. The categories such as qualitative and quantitative are related with such concepts as space and time, within the manifold of multiplicity. Something more, in his interpretation Hegel emphasizes on the plasticity and elasticity of the ether, the spiritual substance of the absolute. As Cantillo asserts, “The spiritual substance first finds objective expression as ether or absolute, infinite and indeterminate matter. In its absolute restlessness, this ether, or absolute matter, is like the spirit, which is equal to itself in its being other than itself: it is the capacity to take up any form – absolute plasticity and elasticity.”(Cantillo, 2013:45) In his discussion on the plasticity and elasticity of spirit, or ether, Cantillo relates to Giordano Bruno’s argument that “ether […] knows no specific quality, but receives all those lent to it by nearby bodies.” (Cantillo, 2013:46) As Cantillo asserts, “Ether, as the highest part of the sky, as light expanding in an absolute way, is absolutely infinite. Its moments are only “ideal moments, which in their mutual opposition refer to one another”; they “are absolutely restless in this relation” and remove one another in their separateness. These moments of the ether, “which immediately discloses itself as genuinely infinite”, are space and time. This “infiniteness is motion”; or rather: “as totality, it is a system of spheres and motions [heavenly bodies]”.(Cantillo, 2013:47) Space and time present themselves as ideal moments of the ether, which is to say of nature as directly posited by the spirit as its first manifestation. These are ideal moments because the reality of the ether is both its self-equality, its sameness to itself, and its infiniteness, its infinite motion. Its self-equality and being at rest represent the moment of space, considered separately; yet insofar as this manifests itself, insofar as it objectively fulfils its being in itself, it represents the opposite of self-equality and being at rest: it is the moment of infinity and motion (from the equal to its opposite, the unequal and different) – hence, time. 

Just as infinite as space, time, as an ideal moment, in becoming other than itself spills into its opposite, into self-equality and rest, thus becoming space. Ether, as the whole, possesses this motion within itself, so that from space it becomes time and from time space, since the whole is the unity of the self-equal and the different .”(Cantillo, 2013:47)

Hegel’s ether immediately posits itself as space and this idea is similar to how ether is understood by Bruno and Kepler, according to whom all space is filled with ether. Even Newton believed that ether fills space, at least within the solar system.

For Cantillo, “Yet this notion is here turned on its head, so to speak, since according to Hegel it is ether, as the totality of all moments, that constitutes the reality of space and time: “the reality of space and time […], as separate terms, is the expression of the totality of moments”; the “essence” of each of these remains their mutual “relation”. (Cantillo, 2013:47) 

For Hegel, space as absolute space, by its very concept, is self-equality which has difference, the infinite, outside itself, and hence also the negative, limit, outside itself. Within absolute space, this limit, this counterpart to the infinite, or time, is the point: “Just as time moves outside itself and becomes space, so space must move into itself and remove itself through the point”. The point introduces a limitation within the indeterminate continuity of space. This, however, does not make absolute space determined space, but rather introduces “the concept of a general dimension within it”. Yet, because of this indeterminate limitation, in the very act of positing itself in space, this dimension is likewise “removed” – not eliminated, but simultaneously negated and preserved. This means that “a second dimension in general” is placed “as a [determined] limiting which relates to the indeterminate limiting of space”. This new dimension presents itself as “the first being- limited of space, as surface”, which is “the relation between two dimensions”, “the union of the negative and space”. This means that the surface is the being-other or opposite of space, placed in relation to space itself, which therefore appears to be divided, yet not negated, but on the contrary reconfirmed in its indifference and universality:  It, the surface, is indeed the limiting of space, yet it is not the free limit itself, like a negative, but rather the union of the negative and space, the synthesis of both. In other words, it is the opposite of space placed in relation to space itself, as the negation of space, so that this is only divided – there are two spaces, but in such a way that space is indifferent in this negation and remains equal to itself, and its negation is nothing at all.  

In the text from 1804-05 Hegel draws attention to the fact that while the dimensions of space are the moments of the realisation of space, they might also be other than three (“the determination of number – Hegel writes – immediately comes about as an extrinsic determination, which has the form of contingency”).

Büttner has examined Hegel's aether doctrine from the perspective of a Luhmann-kind-of system philosophy.  From such a system-philosophical perspective, Hegel's 'aether' (which, as we should remember, was associated with spiritual qualities) is said to play the role of an 'observer' which 'observes' the self-unfolding of the self-conscious spirit during the course of its history. Moreover Büttner also compared in [2] Hegel's notion of 'aether' with Plato's concept of χώρα (chora) in the book of Timaeus. 

It is an important aspect of modern physics, not just of quantum physics, that the observer determines part of what can be observed. This realisation began with Einstein's theory of special relativity which gave up the Newtonian concept of absolute space and time. Two observers, for example, do not generally perceive the same time differences between events; the time differences they measure depend on their relative state of motion. A brief claim of relevance in favour of Hegel's philosophy of nature with regard to contemporary physics was made by Gies . 

There are comments on the similarity of Hegel’s physics to aspects of general relativity (Wandschneider 1982) and comprehensive work on Hegel’s philosophy of special relativity (Paterson 2006).  Topology is Analysis Situs, the science of space. Topological account could be found in Hegel’s assertion that space preceding time.  (Paterson 2006:3) 

As Paterson asserts in his A modern Hegelian Philosophy of Special Relativity (2006): “The roles of space and time in Hegel's account are asymmetric – space preceding time.  – whereas in special relativity, we must think of them as inseparably together, a unity of space-time.” (Paterson 2006:3)  Paterson argues that “in fact looked at more closely, space and time are distinguished in special relativity and that the Hegelian account, suitably developed, makes philosophical sense of space and time as it appears in relativity.” (Paterson 2006:3) 

Paterson shows how the Hegelian approach can be sutiably developed and gives an adequate philosophical account of the spatio-temporal basis for special relativity. 

William Lawvere, in the series of works, also emphasize on the presence of spacetime concept in Hegel. For William Lawvere, in modern terminology Hegel’s discussion in Philosophy of Nature would be read as addressing spacetime event, namely in the disappearance and regeneration of space in time and of time in space as motion– a becoming, which, however, is itself just as much immediately the identically existing unity of both, or matter. 

One of the important concept and phenomena related with the manifold of spacetime is the Elasticity or Plasticity. Elasticity is commonly used as an illustration via analogy of the nature of space in physics, specifically that of manifolds and spacetimes. William Lawvere emphasized on elasticity and analogy with a quality of space, pointing out that Hegel goes on to speak of cohesion being refined to elasticity in the Paragraph 297 of Philosophy of Nature, where Zusatz/Elasticity is the whole of cohesion. According to Paragraph 298 from the Philosophy of Nature this elasticity is related to the unity of opposites that constitute  Zeno's paradox of motion, hence to the modern concept of differentiation via a limit of a sequence. For Lawvere, in terms of categorical logic this is precisely what is encoded in the infinitesimal shape modality and infinitesimal flat modality of “differential cohesion”. Sticking to imagery from solid state physics, these modalities are reminiscent of concepts in infinitesimal strain theory. Notice that this applies to structures built from relatively stiff elastic materials. According to Lawvere, In order to think of not just topology but Riemannian geometry in the above context of elasticity, the rigidity mentioned further above seems advisable. A rigidly elastic body is to be expected to produce sound when struck. This is a common imagery in Riemannian geometry, as in “hearing the shape of a drum”.--- Physical oscillations (of elastic bodies) are described via a wave equation and hence by the spectrum of a Laplace operator on a Riemannian manifold. The phrase hearing the shape of a drum in this context refers to the issue of recovering a Riemannian manifold from just the spectrum of the Laplace operator on it (“spectral geometry”). In plain Riemannian geometry there are counter-examples to the possibility of recovering Riemannian manifolds from just the spectrum of their Laplace operator. But from a little bit more of information, enhancing the Laplace operator to a spectral triple it becomes possible in general. This theorem due to Alain Connes is the motivation for the formulation of all of metric geometry via spectral triples, a program which is known as Connes’ noncommutative geometry. References for elasticity in the solid state physics are provided by Lev Landau (Landau 1970), Andrei Sakharov (Sakharov 1967), Charles Misner (Misner 1973).   

William Lawvere asserts that the concept of cohesion/elasticity/plasticity is one of the most important concepts that is presented in Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature (§296), that refers to the modern science. Lawvere discusses ‘cohesion’ with the following remarks:

In Hegel’s Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1817) there is discussion (in the section Physik – Die Kohäsion) of the cohesion and elasticity of some substance which Hegel says is the unity of space and time (PN§261): “This disappearance and regeneration of space in time and of time in space is motion – a becoming, which, however, is itself just as much immediately the identically existing unity of both, or matter.” (PN§261)

In Hegel, space and time transmute into each other, forming a unity. The appropriate modern word for this is clearly spacetime. Hegel’s perspective fits well with modern general relativity. (Wandschneider 1982:82) 
 
For Lawvere, “elasticity is the existence of the dialectic of these moments themselves” points to a unity of opposites. The cohesion and elasticity here is not so much that of actual physical bodies, but more of mathematical space itself (matter is the union of space and time anyway PN§261). Viewed this way speaking of a “sound of space” here is precisely what modern mathematics does, in the discussion of hearing the shape of a drum, where it refers to the spectrum of Laplace operators on Riemannian manifolds. Now Riemannian geometry is an example of a Cartan geometry, and Cartan geometry is one of the hallmark concepts formalized in differential cohesion. At the same time, followin PN§298 we think of differential cohesion as the formalization of Hegel’s elasticity.


William Lawvere establishes proposals for formalization of Hegel’s objective logic in categorical logic. (Lawvere 1991), (Lawvere 1992) (Lawvere 1994) (Lawvere 1995) (Lawvere 1997) 

For Hegel, Nature is, in itself a living whole. The movement of its idea through its sequence of stages is more precisely this: the idea posits itself as that which it is in itself; or, what is the same thing, it goes into itself out of that immediacy and externality which is death in order to go into itself; yet further, it suspends this determinacy of the idea, in which it is only life, and becomes spirit, which is its truth.(PN§195).

In paragraph 202a from the Philosophy of Nature, Hegel asserts that “Other mathematical determinations, such as infinity and its relationships, the infinitesimal, factors, powers, and so on, have their true concepts in philosophy itself. It is awkward to want to take and derive these from mathematics, where they are employed in a nonconceptual, often meaningless way; rather, they must await their justification and significance from philosophy.”

In the Philosophy of Nature Hegel made an important discussion of Measure, claiming that “The truly philosophical science of mathematics as theory of magnitude would be the science of measures, but this already presupposes the real particularity of things, which is only at hand in concrete nature.” (PN§202b)

Four-dimensional Euclidean spacetime

In 1905, and later published in 1906, Henri Poincare showed that by taking time to be an imaginary fourth spacetime coordinate (√−1 c t ), a Lorentz transformation can be regarded as a rotation of coordinates in a four-dimensional Euclidean space with three real coordinates representing space, and one imaginary coordinate, representing time, as the fourth dimension. Since the space is then a pseudo-Euclidean space, the rotation is a representation of a hyperbolic rotation, although Poincaré did not give this interpretation, his purpose being only to explain the Lorentz transformation in terms of the familiar Euclidean rotation.  

This idea was elaborated by Hermann Minkowski, who used it to restate the Maxwell equations in four dimensions, showing directly their invariance under the Lorentz transformation. Minkowski further reformulated in four dimensions the then-recent theory of special relativity of Einstein. From this Minkowski concluded that time and space should be treated equally, and so arose his concept of events taking place in a unified four-dimensional spacetime continuum.

In mathematical physics, Minkowski spacetime is a combination of Euclidean space and time into a four-dimensional manifold where the spacetime interval between any two events is independent of the inertial frame of reference in which they are recorded. 

 

Subdivision of Minkowski spacetime with respect to an event in four disjoint sets. The light cone, the absolute future, the absolute past, and elsewhere.  

Minkowski space is closely associated with Einstein’s theory of special relativity, and is the most common mathematical structure on which special relativity is formulated. 

S. Wickramasekara demonstrates how “a topology can be defined in the four dimensional space-time of special relativity so as to obtain a topological semigroup for time. The Minkowski 4-vector character of space-time elements as well as the key properties of special relativity are still the same as in the standard theory. However, the new topological structure allows the possibility of an intrinsic asymmetry in the time evolution of physical systems.”  (Wickramasekara, 2003).

Following the above discussion, we can conclude that, 

there is fourfold of infinities in Hegel: 1) the bad qualitative infinity; 2) the good qualitative infinity; 3) the bad quantitative infinity; 4) the good quantitative infinity and there is a thesis that the fourfold of infinities in Hegel can be linked with the Ancient Greek concepts of Space and Time – the fourfold constructed of Chronos and Kairos, Chora and Topos.

(In “Mediation Fifteen – Hegel, The Arcana of Quantity,” (Badiou, A. 2006:169) Badiou accepts the fourth element of Hegel‘s fourfold: “the good quantitative infinity” (qualitative quantity), called by Badiou, after Hegel, “the quality of quantity”.) 

In his study “Riemann's Conceptual Mathematics and the Idea of Space”  (2009), Arkady Plotnitsky assetred that:

"One might argue that the ancient Greeks had philosophical topology, as is suggested by Plato's concept of khora in Timaeus, which may even be seen as already questioning the very concept of spatiality. But they did not have a mathematical discipline of topology; their only mathematical (exact and quantifiable) science of space was geometry. Anticipated by Leibniz's conception of "analysis situs" (the term used by Riemann and for a while after him), topological ideas were gradually developed by Riemann and others, especially Henri Poincaré, whose work was uniquely responsible for establishing topology as a mathematical discipline.” (Plotnitsky, A. 2009: 105-130)

Examining the “The Spaces of the Baroque (with Leibniz, Riemann, and Deleuze)” (Tilottama Rajan, ‎T. and Plotnitsky, A. 2012), Plotnitsky links the space /topos/ in the Baroque with Plato‘s khora /Timaeus/.

Following the direction given by Plotnitky for the topology of Baroque - topos and chora, we could see the notion of Hegel‘s qualitative quantity into the the fourfold of infinities in Hegel: 

1/. the bad qualitative infinity; 
2/. the good qualitative infinity;
3/. the bad quantitative infinity;
4/. the good quantitative infinity.

This Hegel‘s forufold of infinities is related with the fourfold interplay of the two pair of Ancient Greek categories of time and space. The fourfold is constructed of Chronos and Kairos, Chora and Topos as follow: "Chronochora", "Chronotopos", "Kairochora" and "Kairotopos".

There are two notions of Time and two notion of Space in the Ancient Greek concepts of time and space. The two temporal notion of Time are Chronos and Kairos. Chronos is the quantitative Time and Kairos is the qualitative Time. And there are two spatial notion of Space – Chora and Topos. Chora is the quantitative abstract notion of space and Topos is the qualitative notion of space. The abstract space is Chora and the concrete place is Topos. (Rämö, H. 1999: 309-328)

Aristotle defined Chronos quantitatively as the “number of motion with respect to the before and the after”, which is a classical expression of the concept of (chronos) time as change, measure, and serial order. The definition of Chronos is focused on an exact quantification of time.

Following Aristotele analysis there are temporal and spatial pairs of chronos/kairos and chora/topos, relationships. Kairos is the time that gives value thus quality. Kairos is qualitatively defined. (Rämö, H. 1999: 309-328) The result would produce the following:

- quantitative quantity - /in the domain of Chronochora – Abstract Space and Abstract Time/;
- quantitative quality - /in the domain of Chronotopos –Meaningful Place and Abstract Time/;
- qualitative quantity - /in the domain of Kairochora – Abstract Space and Meaningful Time/;
- qualitative quality - /in the domain of Kairotopos – Meaningful Place and Meaningful Time/.

The temporal and spatial pairs of chronos/kairos and chora/topos relationships are proposed by Hans Rämö (Rämö, H. 1999: 309-328), after José Luis Ramirez    , a leading authority on Aristotle in Sweden. Rämö suggests fourfold model of time-space as configuration combining the four elements is the following neologisms: "Chronochora", "Chronotopos", "Kairochora" and "Kairotopos". Rämö relates these neologisms to the predominant Aristotelian modes of human activity Episteme, Techne and Phronesis, and creates the matrix of time and space configurations /Time-Space Manifold/.

Some particular proposition for the presence of Topological in Hegel is developed by Robert Groome, from P.L.A.C.E., Santa Monica . Groome is the author of the original study “Formalization of Hegel’s Phenomenology of the Spirit”. (Groome, R. 2010)   In his study Groome proposed and developed the thesis of ‘topological’ Hegel, establishing that Hegel’s The Phenomenology of the Spirit [Phänomenologie des Geistes] first appeared in 1807 under the title System of Science. According to Groome, “Here, Knowledge [Wissen/Savoir] or Science [Wissenshaft] has been called by Hegel a System or Manifold (Mannigfaltigkeit), which has both a topological and philosophical sense.” Countering “the standard procedures that view the notion of a Manifold philosophically, if not metaphorically”, Groome’s aim is to read and construct its place topologically, both globally and locally, in a Theory. In proceeding in such a literal way, Groome’s aim is both to introduce a Hegelian theory that is not another philosophical commentary on Hegel's philosophy, but first and foremost an isolation of its structure. Groome’s conclusion is that the Phenomenology of the Spirit and Hegel's conception of phantasy are constructed in a topological structure, while showing the correspondence with Lacan's topological project. In the second part of his study Groome reconstructs the intuitive diagrams presented in the first part of his study in a more adequate topology, introducing a theory of categories, topoi, and sheaves in the formalization of Hegel's “Phenomenology of the Spirit”. 

Excplicit references to the topology in Hegel, could be found in Alain Badiou’s work “The Rational Kernel of the Hegelian Dialectic”, (Badiou, A., Bellassen, J., Mossot , L. 2011)   where Badiou states that “Hegel sustains, against Kant, a new topology of knowledge” and “the historical destiny of this topology is its inevitable division. We can in effect conceive it in a purely structural fashion: exterior and interior are to be discernable at each point, but indiscernible in the supposedly given all. We will say that there is a local subject of interior/exterior separation; however this demands an unconditional global unity of a law. This unity does not have any other evidence than its punctual effect, which is separation. The truth of the one is only insofar as it cannot be said in whole since the whole exists at each point as the act of a partition, of a two. This path is followed by Lacan (but already by Mallarme) in the usage that he makes of non-orientable surfaces like the mobius strip. In its global torsion, the ribbon does not admit to the distinction between interior and exterior. At each point, there is an ‘inverse’, thus an outside. As such, the all rematerializes as the scission interior/exterior, we need to cut the ribbon. We know that for Lacan this cut [coupure] is what precedes the subject: the subject is the act situated between the one of the all and its effect of the orientation of inside/outside. ‘A’ subject is the undoing of torsion.” (Badiou, A., Bellassen, J., Mossot, L. 2011)  

The mathematical concept of manifold brings together geometry and topology and this concept is critical for the philosophical thinking in the tradition of Continental philosophy, as well as the roots of this tradition in Ancient Greek philosophy and geometry. 

The concept of manifold is present in Husserl as Mannigfaltigkeit (variously translated as “manifold” or “multiplicity”). Husserl’s inspiration for elaborating the concept of Mannigfaltigkeit came from the father of the term maniforld - Bernhard Riemann. Cantor also used generally the term “manifold” simply as synonym for “Menge” (quantity), or “Inbegriff” (collection), thereby laying the foundations for set-theory. Indeed, in the 1890s Cantor started calling his work Mengenlehre (“theory of quantities”), instead of Mannigfaltigkeitslehre (“theory of manifolds”). 

Husserl was well aware of the differences between Cantor and Riemann, during the period of the Philosophy of Arithmetic and well awere of the different use of the concept in Cantor and Riemann. According to Husserl, by manifold, Cantor means a simple collection of elements that are in some way united, and however, this conception does not coincide with that of Riemann and as used elsewhere in the theory of geometry, according to which a manifold is a collection not of merely united, but also ordered elements, and on the other hand not merely united, but continuously connected elements. 

Husserl’s Mannigfaltigkeitslehre is nothing to do with the Cantorian set-theory, but come rather closer to topology. In “Prolegomena”, Husserl introduces the idea of a pure Mannigfaltigkeitslehre as a meta-theoretical enterprise which studies the relations among theories, e.g. how to derive or found one upon another. When Husserl announces that in fact the best example of such a pure theory of manifolds is what we actually already have in mathematics, this sounds slightly odd and is a bit misleading. The pure theory of theories cannot simply be the mathematics underlying topology, but should rather be considered as a mathesis universalis. 

Husserl is the founder of formal ontology (Husserl, E. 1929), , which is the natural environment of topology. Husserl's “Logical Investigations” (1900/01) contain a formal theory of part, whole and dependence that is used by Husserl to provide a framework for the analysis of mind and language of just the sort that is presupposed in the idea of a topological foundation for cognitive science. (Smith, B. 1994)   The roots of topology in Husserl can be found in the forerunners of the school of formal ontology - Bernard Bolzano and Franz Brentano (Brentano, F. 1988)  , within the origins of the main traditions of contemporary ontology: the Phenomenological, the Analytical, and the Austro-Polish (with the main exponents as Adolf Reinach, Roman Ingarden and Nicolai Hartmann). After Kant's rejection of the possibility of a general ontology  , the first philosopher who contributed to the new ontological turn was Bernard Bolzano. In his 1837 “Theory of Science” (Wissenschaftslehre), Bolzano attempted to provide logical foundations for all sciences, building on abstractions like part-relation, abstract objects, attributes, sentenceshapes, ideas and propositions in themselves, sums and sets…The logical theory of Bolzano developed in his work “Theory of Science” has come to be acknowledged as groundbreaking.

Bolzano was mainly concerned with three realms: (1) The realm of language, consisting in words and sentences; (2) The realm of thought, consisting in subjective ideas and judgements; (3) The realm of logic, consisting in objective ideas (or ideas in themselves) and propositions in themselves. The distinction between parts and wholes play a prominent role in Bolzano’s system. Bolzano's work “The Paradoxes of the Infinite” was greatly admired by Charles Sanders Peirce, Georg Cantor and Richard Dedekind.

Bolzano’s works was rediscovered by Edmund Husserl  and the Polish philosopher and logician Kazimierz Twardowski , both students of Franz Brentano. Through Husserl and Twardowski, Bolzano became a formative influence on both phenomenology and analytic philosophy. The influence of Bolzano on Heidegger is witnessed by Heidegger himself. (Heidegger, M. 1963)  

According to Husserl, the object of formal ontology is the study of the genera of being, the leading regional concepts, the categories; the true method - the eidetic reduction coupled with the method of categorial intuition. The phenomenological ontology is divided into two: (I) Formal, and (II) Regional, or Material, Ontologies. The former investigates the problem of truth on three basic levels: (a) Formal pophantics, or formal logic of judgments, where the a priori conditions for the possibility of the doxic certainty of reason are to be sought, along with (b) the synthetic forms for the possibility of the axiological, and (c) "practical" truths.

The genealogy of Derrida’s philosophical algebra, especially his algebra of undecidables, could be traced trough Godel back in its roots in Leibniz. Derrida devoted to Leibniz an important section of “Of Gramatology” entitled “Algebra: Arcanum and Transparence”. This work of Derrida deals with the logical algebra …of writing. The strange term is typical for Derrida sense. Leibniz’s ideas concerning the possibility of making topology into a rigorous mathematical discipline were among his great contribution to mathematics. In the 19 century Leibnitz’s topology was developed into modern topology in the works of Karl Friedrich Gauss, Bernhard Riemann, Henri Poincare and others.  In his “The Double Session”, devoted to Deleuze’s topology, Derrida offers us philosophically geometrical topological perspective on or approach to fold. This perspective is Derida’s philosophical algebra, which entails, as Arkady Plotnitsky asserts a certain topology or spatiality. 

1.8.	Topological Fourfold of infinities in Hegel and The Fourfold of Hegelian Judgments

The true topological character of Hegel’s logic, method and subject matter, the topological character of the double negation, where the Understanding and its negation, Dialectical Reason, and the Negation of the Negation – Speculative Reason, can be seen in Carlson’s conclusion  of Why Are There Four Hegelian Judgments?. 

As Carlson asserts, “In Hegel's very last chapter, method and subject matter supposedly conjoin. Method is the one and only subject. We have the Understanding, its negation, Dialectical Reason, and the Negation of the Negation--Speculative Reason. But when all is said and done, there is a hole in the whole. Negation of the negation is not the restoration of the positive thing originally negated. It is less than that. This very absence is the silent fourth--the non-notional individual which guarantees that Logic never ends. It is only by virtue of the silent fourth that Logic is a circle.”  (Carlson 2005). If the ‘whole’, developed from the starting theses of Being – Nothing – Becoming are constructed as torus (see . . .my diagram) there is ‘a hole in the whole” from the very beginning of the Science of Logic (the part I, Chapter 1 – Being, Nothing, Becoming), and this ‘hole’ is ‘developed’ through the speculative reason/logic to the very end of the Science of Logic as double negation, the ‘void’, the ‘very absence” of the ‘silent fourth’, that made ‘the Logic is a circle’. Actually the ‘logic is (not) a circle of circles’ (Hegel), it is the torus and topology.   

Carlson concludes that “Hegel's method is traditionally viewed as the passage from immediate Understanding to mediated Dialectical Reason to Speculative Reason, which holds the prior two positions in tension.Yet there is always a fourth. Method must work on something. This something is an irrational, non-methodical material without which the Heracleitan flux cannot flow. In the judgment chapter, this "silent fourth" finally speaks. In judgment, not only must the notion objectify itself in a notional way, it must judge its non-self--say what this is. The three notional moments, together with the non-notional self, comprise Hegel's four judgments.”   (Carlson 2005).


 


…………….the circle of circles or the fourfold of infinities in Hegel’s logic, presented through the model of cobordism, correspond strongly to the proposition made by David G. Carlson in his paper Why Are There Four Hegelian Judgments? ( Carlson 2005).  

As David Carlson asserts, “Hegel is the philosopher of threes.” (Carlson 2005:114) Carlson remarks that “In the Encyclopedia system, there is logic-nature-spirit. Within logic, there is being-essence-notion. Within notion, there is subject-object-idea. Within subjectivity, there is notion-judgment-syllogism. Yet, as everyone notices, when it comes to judgment, the structure is tetrachotomous”, confirms Carlson and adds that “here we find existence-reflection- necessity-notion. Why should there by four judgments when there are only three of everything else?” (Carlson 2005:114).

For Carlson, the four judgments replicate the logic of quality, quantity, actuality and notionality. (Carlson 2005:114). Across the four judgments, individuality travels around. “It starts as the subject, it travels to the predicate, it travels to the copula, and it encompasses the copula and the extremes, while still preserving the necessity of non-notional contingency.”  (Carlson 2005:114). 

The four judgments in Hegel are:

(1) Judgment of Existence. 
(2) Judgment of Reflection.
(3) Judgment of Necessity.
(4) Judgment of the Notion.

 (1) Judgment of Existence. In the judgment of existence, some property of the subject is singled out arbitrarily: Hegel's example is "the rose is fragrant."13 It has the form A = {A, B, C}, but this is misleading. The rose is still a rose even if not fragrant. In this first judgment, A is abstract and self-sufficient. It has no need of the predicate. Speculatively, A is the lack of identity between itself and the notion. Therefore, A = {A, B, C}, but also A … {A, B, C}.14 At first, A (the subject of notion's self judgment) is everything; the predicate {A, B, C} is nothing. Individuality rests with A, the abstract universal.

(2) Judgment of Reflection. Whereas the judgment of existence plucked some inessential predicate of the subject (the rose's fragrance), the judgment of reflection makes the predicate universal; the subject is merely an instance of the grander predicate: this thing is useful, or this man is mortal.

In the judgment of existence, A was what Hegel would call diverse from {A, B, C}. Diverse things are finite immediate beings. Finite Beings must, on their logic, pass away. If A is diverse, A's fate to become nothing.15 Accordingly, in the judgment of reflection, the subject becomes nothing. The predicate {A, B, C} becomes everything.16 Since the predicate is fixed,17 it now claims for itself the state of individuality, at the expense of the subject. One way of expressing this is that abstract A (the subject) turns into notional B (particularity), so that now B = {A,B, C}.

(3) Judgment of Necessity. In the judgment of necessity, the genetic requirements of the subject are emphasized. Instead of "this individual is mortal," we have "all individuals are mortal." 

In the judgment of reflection, the subject (B) stated, "I do not exist. I am not the predicate {A, B, C}." Yet if {A, B, C} is diverse, it too must pass away as a finite being. But now B and {A, B, C} have a commonality. They both must pass away. This is their necessary connection. Connection (or copula) is the only thing that has staying power. Subject and predicate have no "being for self." Individuality now resides in the unity of subject and predicate. B morphs into C. Now C = {=, …}. C represents "the unity of self and other," in our colloquial formula. But shall the copula be {=} or {…}? This is a matter of blind accident. All we know is that  subject and predicate are related positively or negatively.

(4) Judgment of the Notion. The judgment of the notion is normative: this individual is as she should be, or this house is good. 

The copula was front and center in the judgment of reflection. But copulae cannot do without subject and predicate. These are the means by which C, the individual, expresses itself as copula. Individuality as copula now subsumes subject and the predicate. Notion now knows itself to be fully present in all its moments. Key here is the idea that there are notional moments and non-notional moments. But how can we tell which is which? Nothing in these moments betrays their true nature. About these moments there is nothing but doubt--except that either the moments are notional or they are not. Meanwhile, C = {A, B, C} and C … {A, B, C}.

As Carlson suggests, across the four judgments, then, individuality travels around. It starts as the subject, it travels to the predicate, it travels to the copula, and it encompasses the copula and the extremes, while still preserving the necessity of non-notional contingency. By this means, the four judgments replicate the logic of quality, quantity, actuality and notionality. (Carlson 2005:114).

Being – Essence – Notion (unity of Being and Essence) – Essence (is the twice-told tale) – (the realm of mediation) – Essence is doubled (must be – Hegel states), so judgment must be immediate, twice mediated, and notional (i.e., triune).  

According to Hegel, the three kinds of judgement are parallel to the stages of Being, Essence, and Notion, yet the second of these kinds, as required by the character of Essence, which is the stage of differentiation, must be doubled . . . [W]hen the Notion, which is the unity of Being and Essence in a comprehensive thought, unfolds . . . it must reproduce these two stages in a transformation proper to the notion . . . 

Carlson directs to Hegel own explanation in the Science of Logic and the Encyclopedia Logic. In the Science of Logic Hegel does not allude very directly to the change, but in the Encyclopedia Logic, Hegel explains:

the different species of judgement derive their features from the universal forms of the logical idea itself. If we follow this clue, it will supply us with three chief kinds of judgement parallel to the stages of Being, Essence, and Notion. The second of these kinds, as required by the character of Essence, which is the stage of differentiation, must be doubled . . . [W]hen the Notion, which is the unity of Being and Essence in a comprehensive thought, unfolds . . . it must reproduce these two stages in a transformation proper to the notion . . . (In Carlson 2005:114)

In this passage, Hegel suggests that it is the function of judgment to replay the objective logic, which had sublated itself at the end of essence. In the course of this dumb show for the sake of subjective notion, essence is the twice-told tale. Essence is the realm of mediation, so that judgment must be immediate, twice mediated, and notional (i.e., triune).

Carlson asks – “Can someone explain to me the quadruplicity concept instead of the triplicity in the dialectics? Or point me in a direction that has a written answer.” (Carlson 2005:114)

Carlson asserts that “Hegel does not limit the above remark to judgment. Perhaps he is saying that, throughout the subjective logic, where the notion reestablishes its own reality, there is always quadruplicity, since mediation (i.e., negativity) is always both a mediation and an immediacy. If so, the question arises why only the judgment chapter and, we should add, the first third of syllogism, are overtly tetradic in form.” (Carlson 2005)

In the introduction to the Science of Logic, Hegel suggests that the only valid exposition of philosophy is one that conforms to the "simple rhythm" of method, which is arguably triune. The divisions, headings, sections and chapters serve only “to facilitate a preliminary survey and strictly are only of historicvalue. They do not belong to the content and body of the science but are compilations of an external reflection which has already run through the whole of the exposition and consequently knows and indicates in advance the sequence of its moments before these are brought forward by the subject matter itself.”

In other words, Hegel himself, having worked through the system, inserts the headings solely for expositional convenience. The headings have nothing to do with the logic itself. This leads one to believe that perhaps we should make nothing at all out of the quadripartite headings in Judgment.

Shall we say that tetrachotomy is simply an error by Hegel? There is some reason to think so. In Measure, Hegel denounces Kant's table of categories precisely because they are tetrachotomous.6 No triplicity inheres between Kant's quantity, quality, relation and modality, Hegel complains. For this very reason, Hegel writes, Kant "was unable to hit on the third to quality and quantity."  Hegel implies that "modality" was Kant's true third --a term Hegel equates with Measure. 

All of Hegel's judgments can be found in Kant's table of categories and judgments. Of course, Hegel reverses Kant's priority and analyzes "qualitative judgments" first, consistent with the general priority of quality over quantity. He also renames the major headings. Instead of quantity-quality-relation-modality, Hegel gives us existence-reflection-necessity-notion.

In Kant we have Quantity-Quality-Relation-Modality. In Hegel there are Existence-Reflection-Necessity-Notion.

Carlson states that “It is certainly odd that Hegel should criticize the quadripartite Table of Categories while following the related Table of the Logical Functions of Judgment.” (Carlson 2005:114). He recalls how Slavoj Žižek, as brilliant reader of the Science of Logic, defends Hegel: “Let us immediately show our cards: the three judgments actually acquire a fourth because 'Substance is Subject'; in other words, the 'lack of identity' between subject and predicate is posited as such in the fourth judgement (that of the Notion). (In Carlson 2005: supranote 12).

Carlson shares Žižek’s defence of Hegel's tetrachotomous judgment, but in different terms. Carlson argues that it is not the last but the first judgment, the judgment of existence or inherence—that stands for the diversity of subject and predicate. The last judgment in fact vindicates a unity between identity and difference. In Carlson’s proposition we can find true topological notion both in mathematical topology manner and in rhetorical (Metalepsis). The "diverse" subjectivity on display in the first of the judgments (which reappears in the last of the judgments) is an acknowledgement of an external reflection that haunts all parts of the Science of Logic, asserts Carlson.

In ansering the question - Why are there four judgments?- Carlson emphasize on the “the silent fourth that energizes the logic”, bringing to our attention what Hegel writes, that quantity depends upon an other for its determination. Who is this "other" but the silent fourth? Of quantity,  Hegel writes that "determinateness in general is outside itself." Quantity is "posited as self-repelling, as in fact having the relation-to-self as a determinateness in another something (which is for itself)." This means that quantitative distinction is externally imposed. Quantity requires a silent fourth--an external mathematician who counts.

Measure likewise points to a measurer - a silent fourth external to the logic itself that raises the temperature of things in order to produce a qualitative change. Qualitative change is accomplished by quantitative change, which is defined as that which comes from the outside. "As a quantum [Measure] is an indifferent magnitude open to external determination and capable of increase and decrease. But as a measure it is also distinguished from itself as a quantum, as such an indifferent determination, and is a limitation of that indifferent fluctuation about a limit." Thus, measure stands for susceptibility to outside manipulation. A silent fourth is directly implied by measure. 

Calson states that “the disjunctive syllogism is the point that the universal subject is all its predicates, but this subject still requires a non-notional object--a non-universal that constitutes a fourth to triune subjectivity. The subject's object must eventually be rendered notional. Through the dialectic of objectivity (mechanism-chemism-teleology), the silent fourth is further developed until, in Teleology, the silent fourth is revealed to be the subject's very own self. Two subjects face each other in Teleology. The silent fourth itself becomes three. … That is the very Idea of Hegel's Science of Logic.” (Carlson, 2005:125).

Carlson’s conclusion suggests topological notion and analogy with the torus - “There is a hole in the Whole…”(Carlson, 2005:125). 

In Hegel's very last chapter, method and subject matter supposedly conjoin. Method is the one and only subject. We have the Understanding, its negation, Dialectical Reason, and the Negation of the Negation--Speculative Reason. But when all is said and done, there is a hole in the whole. Negation of the negation is not the restoration of the positive thing originally negated. It is less than that. This very absence is the silent fourth--the non-notional individual which guarantees that Logic never ends. It is only by virtue of the silent fourth that Logic is a circle. (Carlson, 2005:125).



 
The torus is defined as a Cartesian product of two circles  . The torus has a single path-connected component, two independent one-dimensional holes (indicated by circles in red and blue) and one two-dimensional hole as the interior of the torus. The corresponding homology groups are
 

The two independent 1D holes form independent generators in a finitely-generated abelian group, expressed as the Cartesian product group  .

Hegel's tetrachotomous judgment suggest topological logic and notion of Homology. Homological theory can be said to start with the Euler polyhedron formula and Euler characteristics, followed by Riemann's definition of genus and n-fold connectedness numerical invariants in 1857 and Betti's proof in 1871 of the independence of "homology numbers" from the choice of basis. 

2.	Topological Model of Cobordims and Categories of Hegel’s multiplicity

The first language of infinity is the image. The image is the form of recollection. (Verene 2007:xiv-xv).  

Donald Phillip Verene emphasizes on the role of the image in philosophical text, stating that “Any philosophical text depends upon images; they are always present. The reader can look first not for arguments in the work but for these root images. Once found, the reader can look for the questions that can be drawn forth from the images. The reader will then see how the image is directing and providing support for the question, which carries the reasoning process of the text forward. What are the images? What are the questions embedded in them?” (Verene 2007:xiv-xv).  

The visual side of topological metaphorical speculative thinking and reasoning in Hegel is presented in the term Vorstellung (picture-thinking, figurative thinking)  Verene points out that “This is Hegel’s contrasting term to thought done in the true philosophical form of the concept (Begriff).”  Hegel also characterizes the stage of consciousness that he calls “Religion,” the  stage immediately before that of “Absolute Knowing,” as a stage in which thought has the shape of Vorstellungen (picturethoughts). Verene asserts that “Vorstellung is not easily translated by any single English term that will suit all or most contexts. It is a flexible and easily used term in German. Verene emphasized on the use of Vorstellung (Picture-thinking, Figurative thinking) also in his Hegel's Recollection: A Study of Images in the 'Phenomenology of Spirit.

Following the above assertion, it seems natural for the contemporary commentators of Hegel to elaborate such a picture thoughts within images and diagrams.

In the series of papers and A Commentary on Hegel's Science of Logic considered not only as the first English language full commentary on the monumental The Science of Logic, but as a major advancement in the study of Hegelian philosophy, David Gray Carlson has devised a system for diagramming every single logical transition that Hegel makes, many of which have never before been explored in English. The topological approach in Hegel’s Science of Logic is evident in Carlson’s diagrams for clarifying the argumentative structure of each move of the text in the fashion of complicated Venn diagram called a Borromean Knot (Lacan’s famous Borromean knots). Carlson presents Hegel’s logic in the form of pictorial triads of overlapping concepts, in the quite topological mode of Lacanian knots (Carlson 2003a).  

The “inapparent” topological (in) Hegel is revealed only through the pentimento offered by Carlson, as we read in the publisher’s review of the book: “The author has devised a system for diagramming every single logical transition that Hegel makes, many of which have never before been explored in English. This reveals a startling organizational subtlety in Hegel's work which heretofore has gone unnoticed. In the course of charting Hegel's logical progress, the author provides a vigorous defence and thorough explication of unparalleled scale and scope.” Carlson’s diagrams are really evoking the topological qualitative quantity of the Lacan’s famous Borromean knot, where no one of the rings is directly tied to the other, but if you cut one of the rings the other two slip away.“ (quotation…) 

Carlson’s diagrams are constructed with three rings representing triads of circles, where the movement to the new element in development of Hegel’s logic as inclusion and extraction is illustrated with segments and vectors. Such representation of development of Hegel’s though remains captured to Lacanian topological presentation of Borromean knots and lack topological dimensionality since the segments from the overlapping circles. Such visual representation is accompanied with the text where Carlson addresses the segments only with numbers, for example 7 is the in-self of 3 which is mediation of 4, 5, 6. The lack of naming these segments is quite distracting. There is a lack of true topological sense with the above mentioned extraction of segments, for example the qualitative quantity is the third ring linked with quality and quantity in the diagram of measure and if one cut off the qualitative quantity, the notion of the two – quality and quantity will remain incomplete and non-topological.

As it is mentioned in Christopher Yeomans’s review of A Commentary on Hegel's Science of Logic (2007): “Carlson’s primary device for clarifying the argumentative structure of each move of the text is complicated Venn diagram called a Borromean Knot. This is a figure that Jacques Lacan has found significant and made prominent, but though there is also some discussion of Lacan in the commentary (to my mind the most interesting discussions in the text are those in which Hegel’s concepts are compared with Lacan’s), there is no general discussion on the comparative significance of the Knot for both thinkers . . “ 

The picture thoughts within images and diagrams is exhibited by Julie E. Maybee in her Picturing Hegel: An Illustrated Guide to Hegel's Encyclopaedia Logic (2009).  If Carlson exhibits Hegel’s logic in the form of pictorial triads of overlapping concepts (2003a: 93-101), Maybee in her Picturing Hegel: An Illustrated Guide to Hegel's Encyclopaedia Logic offers her own diagrams. 

My proposition and interpretation of Hegel’s Logic implements two topological constructs – cobordism and simplicial complex.

As William Lawvere observes and discusses in his paper Unity and identity of opposites in calculus and physics (Lawvere, 1996)   - A significant fraction of dialectical philosophy can be modeled mathematically through the use of “cylinders” (diagrams of shape Δ) in a category, wherein the two identical subobjects (united by the third map in the diagram) are “opposite”. In a bicategory, oppositeness can be very effectively characterized in terms of adjointness, but even in an ordinary category it may sometimes be given a useful definition. . . .  The description in engineering mechanics of continuous bodies that can undergo cracking is clarified by an example involving lattices, raising a new questions about the foundations of topology.” (Lawvere, 1996).

Following Lawvere’s suggestion about the use of “cylinders” (diagrams of shape Δ) I will direct attention to two topological constructs. The first based on cylinders is the cobordism and the second based on the shape Δ addresses the simplicial complex. 


  
A cobordism (W; M, N).
"A sample cobordism, between a sphere and a torus."


From the two circles (or annuli  ) of the Pure Being and Pure Nothing, Hegel constructs the triad of Becoming just to deconstruct it, deriving the Determinate Being (Quality), demonstrating the move from Becoming (the Determinate Being) to the Determinate Being (Quality). 

In Hegel’s Logic the manifolds of  Pure Being (M) and Pure Nothing  (N) are cobordant (aborder) if their disjoint union is the boundary of a manifold one dimension higher. The notion of cobordism is simple - two manifolds M and N are said to be cobordant if their disjoint union is the boundary of some other manifold (W) or the “Third”. The third is Becoming.

Being and Noting, Quality and Quantity are in fundamental equivalence relation in Hegel’s Logic, forming classes of compact manifolds of the same dimension, which is set up using the concept of the boundary if a manifold. Any of the two manifolds from each of Hegel’s triads – Being and Noting and Quality and Quantity (for example), are cobordant since their disjoint union is the boundary of a manifold and forms the boundary of the third – Becoming and Qualitative quantity. The boundary – the third manifold is one dimension higher.   

The boundary of an (n + 1)-dimensional manifold W (Becoming) is an n-dimensional manifold ∂W that is closed, i.e., with empty boundary. In general, a closed manifold need not be a boundary: cobordism theory is the study of the difference between all closed manifolds and those that are boundaries. The theory was originally developed for smooth manifolds (i.e., differentiable), but there are now also versions for piecewise-linear and topological manifolds.

A cobordism between manifolds M and N is a compact manifold W whose boundary is the disjoint union of M and N,  .

The mathematical concept of manifold brings together geometry and topology and is critical for philosophers in the tradition of Continental philosophy, as well as the roots of this tradition in Ancient Greek philosophy and geometry. 

Hegel’s The Phenomenology of the Spirit [Phänomenologie des Geistes] first appeared in 1807 under the title System of Science, and in the text Hegel called Knowledge [Wissen/Savoir] or Science [Wissenshaft] - a System or Manifold (Mannigfaltigkeit), which has both a topological and philosophical sense. The proposition of Topological Hegel is developed by Robert Groome, from P.L.A.C.E., Santa Monica . Groome is the author of the original study “Formalization of Hegel’s Phenomenology of the Spirit”.   

In his study Groome proposed and developed the thesis of topological Hegel. According to Groome the Phenomenology of the Spirit and Hegel's conception of phantasy are constructed in a topological structure, while showing the correspondence with Lacan's topological project. 

The mathematical concept of manifold could be traced to Leibniz, but it was Reimann who elaborated the concept. As Arkady Plotnitsky recalls Deleuze in his influential work “Algebras, Geometries and Topologies of the fold: Deleuze, Derrida and Quasi-Mathematical thinking with Leibniz and Mallarme” – “the noun “manifold” marked the end of dialectics and the beginning of topology”.

The mathematical concept of maniforld is cruicial to the philosophy of Deleuze, who took his topology from Leibniz (Deleuze, The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque”, 1993)

The manifold is topological space, a kind of patchwork of (local) spaces, each of which can be mapped by a (flat) Euclidean, or Cartesian coordinate map, without allowing for a global Euclidean structure or a single coordinate system for the whole except in the limited case of a Euclidean homogenous space itself. Every point has a small neighbourhood that can be treated as Euclidean, while the manifold as a whole cannot.

The concept of manifold is present in Husserl as Mannigfaltigkeit (variously translated as “manifold” or “multiplicity”). Husserl’s inspiration for elaborating the concept of Mannigfaltigkeit came from the father of the term maniforld - Bernhard Riemann. Cantor also used generally the term “manifold” simply as synonym for “Menge” (quantity), or “Inbegriff” (collection), thereby laying the foundations for set-theory. Indeed, in the 1890s Cantor started calling his work Mengenlehre (“theory of quantities”), instead of Mannigfaltigkeitslehre (“theory of manifolds”). 

Husserl is well aware of the differences between Cantor and Riemann, during the period of the Philosophy of Arithmetic and well awere of the different use of the concept in Cantor and Riemann. According to Husserl, by manifold, Cantor means a simple collection of elements that are in some way united, and however, this conception does not coincide with that of Riemann and as used elsewhere in the theory of geometry, according to which a manifold is a collection not of merely united, but also ordered elements, and on the other hand not merely united, but continuously connected elements. 

Husserl’s Mannigfaltigkeitslehre is nothing to do with the Cantorian set-theory, but come rather closer to topology. In “Prolegomena”, Husserl introduces the idea of a pure Mannigfaltigkeitslehre as a meta-theoretical enterprise which studies the relations among theories, e.g. how to derive or found one upon another. When Husserl announces that in fact the best example of such a pure theory of manifolds is what we actually already have in mathematics. , this sounds slightly odd and is a bit misleading. The pure theory of theories cannot simply be the mathematics underlying topology, but should rather be considered as a mathesis universalis. 

Husserl will later explicitly tie together the notions of pure theory of manifolds and mathesis universalis. The mathesis universalis in this sense is formal, a priori and analytic, as theory of theory in general. It is an analysis of the highest categories of meaning and their correlative categories of objects. 

Lets move back to Hegel’s development of the Logic to see how a series of sample cobordisms, between a sphere and a torus is constructed. 

The torus presents the dialectics between Pure Being and Pure Nothing, where the vectors illustrate the relations (magnitudes) between the two forming a mobius strip. This mobius strip is Becoming. The two manifolds of Pure Being (M) and Pure Nothing  (N) are cobordant (aborder) since their disjoint union is the boundary of a manifold one dimension higher – the third manifold is Becoming.

From the two circles (manifolds) of the Pure Being and Pure Nothing, Hegel constructs the manifold is Becoming - diagrams of shape Δ – the triad of Becoming just to deconstruct it, deriving cobordantly the Determinate Being (Quality), demonstrating the move from Becoming (the Determinate Being) to the Determinate Being (Quality). 

 

Next step on the stage is the two fold interplay between the manifolds of Quality (M) and Negation (N), where from their middle Something (W) appears and we have the new triad – new manifold constructed between Quality, Negation and Something, just to dissolve it, moving from W to Something/Other. Here again, the interplay is twofold entity, two manyfolds between Something/Other (M) and Being for Other (N), where Being for Other is also new posited as Being-for-other/Being-for-itself. 

In order to move (one dimension higher) to the new manifold, new triad, here Hegel includes the Determination (W) between Something/Other (M) and Being-for-itself (N). The cobordism (and the triad - diagrams of shape Δ) of the Determination of the In-itself is done, just to be deconstructed again – excluding the middle intersection (W) from the triad and moving to Constitution. 

Then Constitution (M) is opposed to Determination (N) yet these two are in relation of the two fold again. From the relation between the two manifolds – Constitution (M) and Determination (N), the third is born (W) – the Limit (Determinateness as Such). 

The new reborn manifold of Determination as Determinateness as Such is the crown of the new triad, new manifold posited as Limit (W). The crown of the Limit is down in the emerged triad of Finitude. 

Finitude (W) is born from the toposes, the middle intersection, the cobordism between Constitution (M), Determination (N) and Limit (W). Limit is in play with Limitation. The two spheres have something in common, their middle (W) is the seed of Ought, and the new triad is here, new cobordism constructed between the Finitude (M), Limitation (N) and the Ought (W). If Finitude before was the manifold W, now is the manifold (M). 

Again deconstruction is active and Hegel chaining one cobordism with the next, derives from this deconstructed triad the Enriched Finitude, born from the topos of the tree components. The new dual structure between Enriched Finite (M) and Another Finite (N) is established, just to lead us to Infinity (W). 

Infinity - both (W) becoming now (M) - is the crown of the interplay between Enriched Finite (M) and Another Finite (N). The middle three intersections from the cobordant (W) of this triad move to construct the manifold of Spurious Infinity (W) that will become (M). 

Again the Spurious Infinity (M) is involved in the twofold game with Another Finite (N). The posited two are enriched with the True Infinity (W) and the triad/manifold of True Infinity (W) is constructed between the Spurious Infinity (M), Another Infinity (N) and True Infinity (W). Here the journey of Being-for-self begin from the transformed Spurious Infinity as part of the triad. 

Again the twofold interplay is witnessed between the Being-for-self (M) and Being-for-other (N). This double enclosure is named Being-for-one (W). From here, Hegel builds the new manifold, new triad, the triad of One (W) from Being-for-self (M),  Being-for-Other (N), The One(W). From this triad the shadow of new entity emerge – the One in its own self. 

The dual structure of interplay between the One (M) and the Void (N) emerge from the cobordism and Repulsion (W) is included. The very new triad – the manifold of the One/Many Ones (M), the Void/Many Ones (N) and the Repulsion (W) is done. 

The pathway of Attraction is derived from the middle intersection and relation between the One/Many, the Void/Many and Repulsion, and from the Repulsion itself. Attraction (M) and Repulsion (N) are here in the double action. From their interrelation the new triad is born, the triad of Quantity (W), the Quantity (W) will become the Quantity (M). The triad of Quantity is constructed by Quantity (M) – Attraction/One (N) – Repulsion/Many (W). This triad is the nest of Continuity. 

Continuity (W) is in move, implementing in its journey the middle again. The middle between the three circles from the triad/manifold of Quantity needs new face, new role and get this through the interplay between Continuity (M) and Dicreteness (N), their middle. From the topos between the Continuity and Discreteness springs the Enriched Quantity (W), the head of the new manifold/triad embedding the Continuity and Discreteness. 

The very new face and role of Quantity here is the Magnitude. Magnitude (W) is constructed from the toposes of Continuity (M) and Discrteness (N) and the Enriched Quantity (W). The name of this newborn Quantity is the Continuous Magnitude. 

The Continuous Magnitude (M) is free from the old triad of Enriched Quantity and now face his counterpart – Discrete Magnitude (N). The cobordant topos of the two Magnitudes is the seed of new triad, the triad of the Quantum, from which the Amount is derived, constructed from the toposes of the three. Amount is not left untouched and the twofold interplay between the Unit (M) and Amount (N) is here. Their topos introduces the new triad of Number (W) – The Number (M) – Amount (M) – Unit (W). From the common intersection of these three circles, the manifold of Extensive Magnitude (Extensive Quantum) emerges. 

The Extensive Magnitude (M) meets its counterpart - the Intensive Magnitude (N), and Degree (W) is here as their topos. The topos between the Extensive and Intensive Magnitude establishes the new triad, the triad of Quality of Quantum (W) that will become Quality of Quantum (M). 

Intensive Magnitude (Degree) – (W) is born again from the next triad, from the toposes of the previous three. In contrast with the Intensive Magnitude (as twofold between Extensive and Intensive Magnitude), here is the new twofold of Extensive Magnitude (W) which combine the Degree (M) and Extensive Magnitude (N). The topos of the last two leads to the Qualitative Something (W). 

The threefold of Qualitative Something (W) give birth to the Quantitative Infinity. Quantitative Infinity (M) will play with the Quantitative Infinity Progress (N) and produce from their common new triad, where the head will be Infinitely Great/Small. With this new triad, Hegel presents the Direct Ratio (W). 

And again, the Direct Ratio (M) will be involved in twofold action with Inverse Ratio (N). The product from their between will be Ratio of Powers (W). These three ratios will constitute the new triad of Ratio of Powers (W). This triad will lead to the Immediate Measure. 

Immediate Measure (M) and Mediated Measure (N) will form new relation, the triad of the Mediated Immediate Measure. Immediate Measure and Mediated Measure impose a topos, the new triad of Specifying Measure (W). From Specifying Measure the move of the Rule is established. 

The Rule as Limit (M) and Specifying Measure as Amount (N) construct the Rule Measuring its Other. From this double the new topos is born – The Ratio of Measures (Realized or Specifyed Measure) – (W). 

The topos of the new triad will construct the Combination of Measures (W). Hegel sees here the new topological twofold of relations between the Externality of Measure (M) and Measure as Series (N). From the intersection of these two the Series of Measure Relations (W) appears. These two involve as third the Elective affinity (W) and construct new triad from which Continuity of Affinity appears. 

Again, the two - Continuity (M) and Indifference Subtrate (N) - presents the new double of Indifference of Affinity (Substrate) – (W). The topos of these two are the seed of the Nodal Line triad. 

Hegel will deconstruct the triad of the Nodal Line, deriving from it the three circles of the Abstract Measureless (W) moving from the dual interplay between Quality (M) and Abstract Measureless (N). The topos of these two will introduce new triad, the triad of Infinity for Itself (W), from where Hegel will derive Absolute Indifference.

With the new born Hegel attracts again the ratio, this time as Inverse Ratio and will establish the relation between two – Inverse Ratio of Factors. 

Finaly we arrive at the manifold of Essence constructed as triad containing the Absolute Indifference (M) and Inverse Ratio (N).  

The above presentation shows how Hegel construct true topological manifold from which the notion of multiplicity emerges. 

In his speculative logic and semantic Hegel uses the pair of tropes, cobords the pair of terms and categories not only in opposition but in manifold  within their twofold relation, where the emphasis is on the middle, the topos of the logical and semantological space between these tropes, terms, and categories. Merging metaphorical power of rethoric with the charge of speculative reason, it is striking how Hegel creates the blueprints of something, the mode and construct that centuries later will be defined as a cobordism . . . between the pair of manifolds M and N, where the third will appear as a compact manifold W whose boundary is the disjoint union of M and N,  . From this topos and betweenness something new arises as meaning and fruit of speculative thinking, as the core of Hegel’s dialectical method, where mathematical (topological) and philosophical (categorical) emerges. This mode of developing both text and though can be recognized as a double-entendre – the cobordant (W) between (M) and (N). The double-entendre in Hegel’s logic is recognized by Andrew Hass in his ‘Hegel and the Problem of Multiplicity’ (Haas, 2000).  

As Haas suggests: “The particular quality of quantification, the reproduction and restoration is taken care of in the dialectic of qualitative-quantitative concept – and in Hegel, multiplicity means the quantification of quality and the qualification of quantity, a multiplicity of the double-entendre, of the inevitable double-meaning. (Haas, A. 2000: 113).  

In the Science of Logic, Hegel develop his triads as “diagrams of shape Δ” (Lawvere, 1996)  , deriving the new element for the each triad from the twofold pairs of tropes posited in opposition and distilating the new trope, term from the common place, the intersection between these two, from their topos. This rethorical mode used by Hegel represents not only the metonymy but double metonymy – two metonymies, one contained in the other, but only one expressed. For example from the twofold interplay between Quality (M) and Negation (N), from the middle of their relationship, from their topos, the semantological place between these, Something (W) as the third trope and category emerge. When Something appears, we have the new triad constructed between Quality (M), Negation (N) and Something (W). The third element emerges from the double meaning and the triads are constructed from the twofold relation between the two tropes, from their common space, from the intersection between the two circles.

The cobordism - between manifolds M and N is a compact manifold W whose boundary is the disjoint union of M and N,   - provides conceptual model and explanation of the concept of Aufhebung, or sublation, as it arises in G. W. F. Hegel’s dialectical logic. As it is stated by Ryan Krahn – “the concept shall not be understood to function simply as a mere negation of negation, where that would mean an assimilatory determinate negation of a prior moment of abstract negation.” (Ryan Krahn, 2014) Instead, Ryan Krahn argues that “both abstract and determinate negation function at the level of sublation as such and that the concept should thereby be understood not only as a synthesis that combines a term with its antithesis (invokes the popular caricature of a simple thesis-antithesis-synthesis ) , i.e., a unifying third term, but also as a fourth that treats these terms in their difference, holding them apart as oppositional (Ryan Krahn, 2014) 

Ryan Krahn assertion of  quadruplicity of sublation (Ryan Krahn, 2014) is in compliance with David Gray Carlson’s thesis of four Hegelian judgments. (Carlson 2005:114). Carlson’s  asks – “Can someone explain to me the quadruplicity concept instead of the triplicity in the dialectics? Or point me in a direction that has a written answer.” (Carlson 2005:114)

In ansering the question - Why are there four judgments?- Carlson emphasize on the “the silent fourth that energizes the logic”, bringing to our attention what Hegel writes, that quantity depends upon an other for its determination. Who is this "other" but the silent fourth? Of quantity,  Hegel writes that "determinateness in general is outside itself." Quantity is "posited as self-repelling, as in fact having the relation-to-self as a determinateness in another something (which is for itself)." This means that quantitative distinction is externally imposed. Quantity requires a silent fourth--an external mathematician who counts.

Measure likewise points to a measurer - a silent fourth external to the logic itself that raises the temperature of things in order to produce a qualitative change. Qualitative change is accomplished by quantitative change, which is defined as that which comes from the outside. "As a quantum [Measure] is an indifferent magnitude open to external determination and capable of increase and decrease. But as a measure it is also distinguished from itself as a quantum, as such an indifferent determination, and is a limitation of that indifferent fluctuation about a limit." Thus, measure stands for susceptibility to outside manipulation. A silent fourth is directly implied by measure. 

Calson states that “the disjunctive syllogism is the point that the universal subject is all its predicates, but this subject still requires a non-notional object--a non-universal that constitutes a fourth to triune subjectivity. The subject's object must eventually be rendered notional. Through the dialectic of objectivity (mechanism-chemism-teleology), the silent fourth is further developed until, in Teleology, the silent fourth is revealed to be the subject's very own self. Two subjects face each other in Teleology. The silent fourth itself becomes three. … That is the very Idea of Hegel's Science of Logic.” (Carlson, 2005:125).

Carlson’s conclusion suggests topological notion and analogy with the torus - “There is a hole in the Whole…”(Carlson, 2005:125). In Hegel's very last chapter, method and subject matter supposedly conjoin. Method is the one and only subject. We have the Understanding, its negation, Dialectical Reason, and the Negation of the Negation--Speculative Reason. But when all is said and done, there is a hole in the whole. Negation of the negation is not the restoration of the positive thing originally negated. It is less than that. This very absence is the silent fourth--the non-notional individual which guarantees that Logic never ends. It is only by virtue of the silent fourth that Logic is a circle. (Carlson, 2005:125).

The quadruplicity of sublation - the thesis supported by Ryan Krahn. (Ryan Krahn, 2014) is in compliance with our thesis of Topological Notions of Multiplicity in Hegel’s Fourfold of Infinities. Our thesis is strongly supported by the research of Andrew Haas, in particular his book “Hegel and the Problem of Multiplicity”.  (Haas, A. 2000)

This fourfold of infinities (in Hegel) could be expressed in by the term or category of Cobordism - A cobordism (pair of pants) between a single circle (at the top) and a pair of disjoint circles (at the bottom). In topological terms, the notion of Hegel’s Qualitative quantity could be represented with the single circle (at the top) and ‘quality’, and ‘quantity’ a pair of disjoint circles (at the bottom). Cobordisms form a category whose objects are closed manifolds and whose morphisms are cobordisms.

Cobordism had its roots in the attempt by Henri Poincare in 1895 to define homology purely in terms of manifolds. Poincaré simultaneously defined both homology and cobordism, which are not the same, in general. However, Rene Thom, in his remarkable, if unreadable, 1954 paper “Quelques proprietes globales des varietes differentiables”, gave the full solution to this problem for unoriented manifolds, as well as many powerful insights into the methods for solving it in the cases of manifolds with additional structure. It was largely for this work that Thom was awarded the Fields medal in 1958.

David Aubin, provides an intriguing discussion on ‘topology and meaning’ in Rene Thom, stating that “Having pointed out the relevance of topological concepts and practices for the modeling of biological phenomena, Thom saw no reason to stop there. Since the early 1970s, his main field of research, besides philosophy, have been linguistics and semiotics. With his incursion into the human science, Thom was bound to confront structuralism. Never himself a structuralist per se, but trained in the mathematical structuralism of Bourbaki, he was attracted by this movement. With some adjustments, his theories could be made to fit into structuralist model of thought. But because he began to work on linguistics so late, catastrophe theory was only mildly affected by structuralism in practice. Increasingly faced with strong opposition to his ideas about modeling, Thom pondered the epistemological foundations of catastrophe theory. In attempting to articulate the kind of knowledge that the theory produced, he used structuralist resources most obviously.”  (Aubin, 2004)

Thom’s work on cobordism clearly illustrates his intuitive approach as allied with the profound knowledge of Bourbakist methods that guided most of his mathematical work. David Aubin, remind us that Hopf testified, how cobordims was important because of the way it mixed topological and algebraic approaches in the classification of manifolds.  (Aubin, 2004:101) 

The manifold composed of two circles is cobording with the manifold consisting of a single circle because there is a “pant-shaped” smooth surface joining them. Since this is true for manifolds combining any number of circles, the group ‘delta’ is the one-element trivial group. (Aubin, 2004:102)

For Thom, “The problem of cobordism . . . is of knowing when two manifolds can be deformed one into other without encountering a singularity in the resulting space, at the moment in this deformation.” The example of a circle becoming two circles can, very crudely of course, model cell division. (Aubin, 2004:101)

The link or topos between Rene Thom’s catastrophe theory (and topological syntax) and Hegel’s logic and mathematics can be found within the concept of singularities, in particular in Hegel’s discussion on Leibniz and Hegel’s disagreement with Leibniz’ concept of singularity.  Leibniz was the first to introduce the proto topological ideas in his Analysis Situs, and the concept of singularities was critical in his attempt. Rene Thom calls catastrophe theory the application of specific mathematical results in the field of differential topology and the theory of singularities.  For Hegel, concept of singularities is central concept in his formulation of infinities, both ‘bad infinity’ and ‘good infinity.’  Hegel believes that in Leibniz’s philosophy the categories of ‘singularity,’ ‘totality,’ ‘infinite,’ ‘being/reality,’ and ‘possibility’ do collapse on one another. Hegel’s criticized Leibniz’s concept of ‘singularity’ as leading to what for Hegel is ‘bad infinity’.  Antonio M. Nunziante suggests some remarks on the concepts of ‘singularity’ and ‘infinite’ in Leibniz and Hegel, and on how it is possible to find a world of semantic connections that bind Hegel and Leibniz together. Choosing to put ‘singularity’ in relation to the concept of ‘infinite’ was drawn by Hegel’s notation that in Leibniz’s ontology singularity “geht in seiner eigenen Totalität zu Grunde.”  (Nunziante, 2015)


Topology is a generalization of geometry that studies spaces with the degree of generality appropriate to a specific problem. One central concern of topology is to study the properties of spaces that do not change under a continuous transformation, that is, translation, rotation, and stretching without tearing.  One such concept is expressed by the concept of dimension: a curve is one dimensional; a surface has two dimensions; ordinary space, three; and the space-time of general relativity, four. Mathematicians faced with the problem of characterizing a space locally to a Euclidean space use the notion of manifold. An n-dimensional manifold is a space M, such that a neighborhood V exists around each point p of M in one-to-one correspondence with a subset W of the n-dimensional Euclidean space R. The study of manifolds is called differential geometry, and the classification of all manifolds of a given dimension is an important problem of topology. . (Aubin, 2004:101)

In mathematics, cobordism is a fundamental equivalence relation on the class of compact manifolds of the same dimension, set up using the concept of the boundary of a manifold. Two manifolds are cobordant if their disjoint union is the boundary of a manifold one dimension higher. The name comes from the French word bord for boundary.

In mathematics, a ‘pair of pants’ is a simple two-dimensional surface resembling a pair of pants: topologically, it is a sphere with three holes in it. ‘Pairs of pants’ admit hyperbolic metrics, and their isometry class is determined by the lengths of the boundary curves (the cuff lengths), or dually the distances between the boundaries (the seam lengths). In hyperbolic geometry all three holes are considered equivalent – no distinction is made between "legs" and "waist". In cobordism theory the holes are not equivalent – a pair of pants is a cobordism between one circle (the "waist") and two circles (the "legs").
 


In Topology the “pair of pants” is important because it shows how one can "morph" a single circle (the waist) into two circles (the legs); this is technically known as a cobordism. Putting together all these horizontal cross-sections gives the final surface.  

In Philosophical or Dialectical Hermeneutics the “pair of pants” is important because it shows how one can “morph” not only the categories of the “quality” and “quantity” into the fourfold of categories in Hegel, or how one can “morph” Hegel’s fourfold of infinities, but also how one can “morph” the Understanding of human finitude in infinitude and reverse the human infinitude into the finitude, how Hermeneutical Circle can be morph into the Topological Cobordism Ring – how the true Hermeneutical “fusion of horizon” could found in Topology and Topological Hermeneutics.

The Cobordism of Hermeneutical Circle shows how Dialectical Hermeneutics could retrieve itself in Topology. Each of the categories, presenting Hegel’s fourfold of infinities: 

1. Quantitative quantity;
2. Quantitative quality;
3. Qualitative quantity;
4. Qualitative quantity,

could be thought as circle or four circles placed in a 3-manifold.

 

Hegel’s four categories derived from the relation of the “quality” and “quantity” constructing his fourfold of infinities could be seen and represented as cobordism illustrated with the 3-manifolds with corners in the Figure of next page. The cobordism from the so called in topology “pair of pants”, illustrates the pair of categories as circles or annuli   at the top to the two-punctured disc at the bottom.

One of the most important question in my reinterpretation of Hegel’s Logic is How we are moving from Hegel’s triplicity or triadic structure - diagrams of shape Δ – to the quadruplicity of sublation (Ryan Krahn, 2014) and quadruplicity of the four Hegelian judgments (Carlson 2005:114),  from the unifying third term to the ‘fourth’ that treats these terms in their difference, holding them apart as oppositional (Ryan Krahn, 2014). How we are moving to Hegel’s fourfold of infinities implemented in 1. Quantitative quantity; 2. Quantitative quality; 3. Qualitative quantity; 4. Qualitative quantity. 

Hegel’s concept of sublation can be thought of, respectively, as cobordism from one pair of circles to another, and from one circle to two circles. The large cobordism has other boundary components: the outside boundary is itself a cobordism from two circles to one circle; the inside boundary (in dotted lines) is a cobordism from one pair of circles to another pair. We could “compose” this with another such cobordism with corners by gluing along any of the four boundary components: top or bottom, inside or autside. 

This involves attaching another such cobordism along corresponding boundary components by a diffeomorphism.


 


As we can see here the concept of sublation is not be understood to function simply as a mere negation of negation, as assimilatory determinate negation of a prior moment of abstract negation. Instead, both abstract and determinate negation function at the level of sublation as such and that the concept should thereby be understood not only as a synthesis that combines a term with its antithesis, i.e., a unifying third term, but also as a fourth that treats these terms in their difference, holding them apart as oppositional. The quadruplicity of sublation can be thought and interpreted as 3-manifold, where to the presented cobordism of M- N – W there is attached another such cobordism along corresponding boundary components by a diffeomorphism. Cobordism and Diffeomorphism provides the ground for reinterpretation of Hegel’s theory of negation and Hegel’s the four Hegelian judgments. 


Topological notions in Hegel’s concept of becoming are expressed in the logic betweenness, the structure of an either/and. As Krahn asserts – “From the concept of becoming we are able to discern some general characteristics of sublation (such as betweenness, the structure of an either/and, and a fourth element that frustrates the oversimplified, traditional picture of synthetic unity in a third term), each of which will contribute to a preliminary definition of the concept. In so doing, this section will give a preview of the form sublation will take as we later encounter it in the Phenomenology’s master-slave dialectic and the Logic’s conclusion with the Absolute.” (Ryan Krahn, 2014)

If we trace again the development of Hegel’s Logic as presented above interpreted as cobordism, we can see how Hegel applies diffeomorphism, attaching to his triads or three dimensional manifolds another such cobordism along with corresponding boundary components by diffeomorphism. We can see how the middle element (concept) marked as manifold of “W” from the between “M” and “N” becomes the new “M” in the new manifold introduced. The manifold of W contains always the silent fourth its (M). Here is the entrance and introduction (transmission) of new cobordism between manifolds M and N is a compact manifold W.  whose boundary is the disjoint union of M and N. The (W) that will become (M) is the attachment of another such cobordism along corresponding boundary components by a diffeomorphism.There is an internal ‘pair of pants’ inside the initial one. This internal pair of pants is two headed, having two annuli, two circles on (W). This is the double-entendre in Hegel’s logic as recognized by Andrew Hass in his ‘Hegel and the Problem of Multiplicity’ (Haas, 2000).  

The multiplicity of the double-entendre, of the inevitable double-meaning. (Haas, A. 2000: 113)   in rhetorical mode is the mechanism of Hegel’s metalepsis – the metonymy of metonymy.

In the Science of Logic, Hegel develop his triads as “diagrams of shape Δ” (Lawvere, 1996)  , deriving the new element for the each triad from the twofold pairs of tropes posited in opposition and distilating the new trope, term from the common place, the intersection between these two, from their topos. This rethorical mode used by Hegel represents not only the metonymy but double metonymy – two metonymies, one (M) contained in the other (W), but only one expressed. 

For example, from the two circles (manifolds) of the manifolds of Quality (M) and Negation (N), where from their middle Something (W) appears, we have the new triad – new manifold constructed between Quality, Negation and Something. Something which is (W) appears in the new manifold as Something/Other (M). Here again, the interplay is twofold entity, two manifolds between Something/Other (M) and Being for Other (N), where Being for Other is also new posited as Being-for-other/Being-for-itself (W). The diffeomorphism or the two head manifold is presented within the two cobordism where Something is both – first (W) and second (M). Here is the metalepsis and this metalepsis is the chain or attachment of the new cobordism. In order to move (one dimension higher) to the new manifold, new triad, here Hegel includes the Determination (W) between Something/Other (M) and Being-for-itself (N). The diffeomorphism of the new triad of the Determination of the In-itself is done, just to be deconstructed again not only excluding the middle intersection (W) from the triad and moving to Constitution, but renaming and positing this concept. Here the Determination wich before was (W) is now (N). Then Constitution (M) is opposed to Determination (N) yet these two are in relation of the two fold again. From the relation between the two manifolds – Constitution (M) and Determination (N), the third is born (W) – the Limit (Determinateness as Such). In the new manifold the Determination (which was W and then become N, now is Determinateness as Such (the new, enhanced W), the crown of the new triad, new manifold posited as Limit (W). The crown of the Limit is down in the emerged triad of Finitude. 

The figure of Metalepsis, the trope Met-a-lep´sis is constructed from μετά (mĕta), behind, and λείπω (leipô), to leave, a leaving behind. The Figure is so called, because something more is deficient than in Metonymy, which has to be supplied entirely by the thought, rather than by the association or relation of ideas, as is the case in Metonymy. This something more that is deficient consists of another Metonymy, which the mind has to supply. Hence Metalepsis is a double or compound Metonymy, or a Metonymy in two stages, only one of which is expressed. 

Hegel’s language, syntax, concepts and notions have topological nature. The topological is presented in Hegel both as mathema (in his philosophy of mathematics) and as rhetoric. If topological nature of Hegel’s mathesis is presented within his fourfold of infinities (multiplicities) and Hegel’s four type of judgments, Hegel’s rhetoric is bearing the four basic tropes of rhetoric: metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche, ironi as equally presented in his manifold (Mannigfaltigkeit)  of infinities, quality and quantity, time and space. 

David G. Carlson, in his Hegel’s Theory of Measure, in particular in his discussion of (b) Measure as a Series of Measure Relations), states that “Metonymy is the theme of this new section's tongue. Metonymy is the inability to name the thing directly, but only the context of the thing. In metonymy, if the entire context is described, the unnameable thing becomes a ghostly space the existence of which is simply inferred from context.” (David G. Carlson, 2003, Hegel’s Theory of Measure:47)

Both Carlson and Maybee represent in their drawing the diagram of Hegel’s main notions as circles, perhaps following Hegel’s statement that the logic is circle – circle of circles .Yet from the circles we can derive the three partite structure of Hegel’s logic – the triangle and move from the triangle to the simplex – or simplexes, just to end up with the proposition that the structure of Hegel’s Logic can be presented and seen as simplicial complex.

The topological notion of Hegel’s logic contains the seed of topological hermeneutics with “genuine infinite, a circle closed on itself” …The infinite that wants to be unlimited, because as Hegel points out – “there are two worlds, one infinite and one finite, and in their relationship the infinite is only the limit of the finite and is thus only a determinate infinite, an infinite which is itself finite." What the understanding should not forget is that these alternating determinations of the finite and the infinite are ultimately determinations of one unified something.

Topological cobordis is just another dialectical and hermeneutical view on the betweennes of these two somethings – the finite and the infinite.

