
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Manifolds and cobordisms
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include manifolds and cobordisms - contents]]
=--
#### Differential geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include synthetic differential geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The (strong) _Whitney embedding theorem_ states that every [[smooth manifold]] ([[Hausdorff space|Hausdorff]] and [[sigma-compact]]) of [[dimension]] $n$ has an [[embedding of smooth manifolds]] in the [[Euclidean space]] of dimension of dimension $2n$.

Notice that it is easy to see that every smooth manifold embeds into the Eucludean space of _some_ dimension ([this prop.](embedding+of+smooth+manifolds#ManifoldEmbedsIntoLargeDimensionalEuclideanSpace)). The force of Whitney's strong embedding theorem is to find the lowest dimension that still works in general. 

## Related concepts

* The analogous statement for [[Riemannian manifolds]] and [[isometry|isometric]] embeddings is the _[[Nash embedding theorem]]_.

## References

Named after [[Hassler Whitney]].

* {#Pontrjagin55} [[Lev Pontrjagin]], Section 2.2 of: _Smooth manifolds and their applications in Homotopy theory_, Trudy Mat. Inst. im Steklov, No 45, Izdat. Akad. Nauk. USSR, Moscow, 1955 (AMS Translation Series 2, Vol. 11, 1959) ([doi:10.1142/9789812772107_0001](https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/9789812772107_0001))

See also

* Wikipedia, _[Whitney embedding theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitney_embedding_theorem)_

* Paul Rapoport, _Introduction to Immersion, Embeddingand the Whitney Embedding Theorem_, 2015 ([pdf](http://schapos.people.uic.edu/MATH549_Fall2015_files/Survey%20Paul.pdf))


[[!redirects Whitney's embedding theorem]]
[[!redirects Whitney imbedding theorem]]
[[!redirects Whitney's imbedding theorem]]

[[!redirects Whitney's strong embedding theorem]]
[[!redirects Whitney's weak embedding theorem]]

