## Big Pop and the Banging Universe ##

The proposed Cosmology by the Hypergeometrical Universe Theory consists of the Universe being embedded into the hypersurface of a lightspeed expanding hypersphere.

This means that HU proposes the spacetime is actually 5D and it is dynamic and moving at the speed of light.  So, it is a departure from the standard view.



# Hypergeometrical Universe - Viewing the Past #

The proposed topology is of a light-speed expanding hyperspherical hypersurface to represent the spatial coordinates of our Universe.  This means that the 3D Universe is a moving inertial frame with very specific topology, curvature (there are three curvatures one spatial and others spacetime related).

The absolute speed of light for short distances becomes $ \sqrt2c $ .  This doesn't affect any experimental measurements since they are done within the confines of the hypersurface and within very small Cosmological Angles.  A Cosmological Angle is represented in Figure 1 as alpha. 


[Figure1](https://media.licdn.com/mpr/mpr/AAEAAQAAAAAAAAwYAAAAJDdiMGU1MDdlLWM5YTktNDBjNy1hZDRlLTgwZjhlMjdlZWM5Nw.jpg)

This shows how one interprets peering into the past within the Hypergeometrical Universe Theory. We indicated two epochs - the current and the one for the 8 billion years old Universe.
		
Light emission angle with the radial line is always 45 degrees. K-vector direction for the light that we detect is always a line-of-sight vector. The mapping of the Universe Lifeline to Cosmological Angle Alpha is given by [$R_0$,0]$ \,\to\, $[0, $Pi$/4].

From the Law of Sines above, HU calculates d(z) (the Cosmological Ruler):

[Figure2](https://media.licdn.com/mpr/mpr/AAEAAQAAAAAAAAvmAAAAJGVlZjM4NmVlLWI5NzItNDljZi1hNmFhLWEwNTlhZjY1MTljYQ.png)


Simple trigonometry yields:
\begin{equation}
\frac{{sin(\alpha )}}{{d'}} = \frac{{sin(\frac{3}{4}\pi )}}{{{R_0}}} = \frac{{sin(\frac{\pi }{4} - \alpha )}}{{R(t)}}
\end{equation}

A linkedin version of this posting is [here](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/logical-framework-hu-topology-marco-pereira)

# The Cosmic Ruler #

HU derived natural Laws from first principles.  The [Law of Gravitation](https://media.licdn.com/mpr/mpr/AAEAAQAAAAAAAAsNAAAAJDk0YjljMDU0LWU2ZDgtNDNmMi1iNzU4LWM1ZDgxY2M2MmVjZQ.png) has an inverse $R_0$ dependence on the Gravitational Constant.

This means that SN1a (type 1a Supernovae) are epoch-dependent in HU. Correcting for their Luminosity G-dependent, HU was able to predict their distances without a single parameter.

[Figure3](https://media.licdn.com/mpr/mpr/AAEAAQAAAAAAAAwaAAAAJGVkNzQ4ZGZhLWRmZWMtNGExYS1hOTI5LWZjNjIxM2U5YWNlYg.png)

Needless to say, the quality of a theory can be mapped to the number of parameters or unproven physics it relies upon.  The current Standard Cosmological Model is fraught with unproven Physics (Dark Matter, Dark Energy, Inflation Period, Expansion).

#By changing the Cosmological Ruler, HU eliminates the need for anyone of those artifacts. #


## The Big Pop ##

The Big Pop is derived from HU model for matter. In HU, matter is composed of polymers of the Fundamental Dilator (FD).

FD is a coherence between states of deformation of the local metric. This means that matter is made up from deformed space.  FD is a shapeshifting, 4D spinning deformation of space.

With this paradigm, the Cosmogenesis was conceived as being the creation of the Initial Fluctuation (IF).  The IF was a 147 light-second Black Hole density (1E20 Kg/$m^3$) hyperspherical shell or Blackholium.

Inside the Initial Fluctuation one can conceive layers of dilation and compression. HU considers that in this Universe, the outermost layer was a compression.  As soon as the IF was created, it started recombination.  Layer upon layer, dilation and compression layers nullified each other effect upon space until there was an internal dilation layers and the Universe.

The Universe fragmentation into a Blackholium made it unfit to recombined with the inner dilation layer. Since space is dilated inside the hyperspherical shell, it was placed in motion. That is the simple explanation on how to make the whole Universe to travel at the speed of light without the emission of a single photon and yielding a Zero Kelvin (or thereabouts) Blackholium.

So, HU vision of Cosmogenesis doesn't include Planck's Time, Infinite Density nor break any of the Laws of Physics.

# Is it consistent with Astronomical Observations #
Yes. First let's talk about 4D Spacetime or 5D Spacetime.

From Figure 1, one can see that acoustic oscillations would take place along the Cosmological Angle space.  Density oscillations mapped by the Cosmological Angle Alpha would map, on our hypersurface, to be at distance d.

This means that Hyperspherical Acoustic Waves would be visible along the DISTANCE DIMENSION.  This clashes with L-CDM, Inflation, Copernican Hypothesis, General Relativity. None of them have a mechanism for modulating space along distance(i.e. to create hyperspherical waves).

# [Astronomical Observations by SDSS BOSS](https://media.licdn.com/mpr/mpr/AAEAAQAAAAAAAAmQAAAAJDJmNTgwZTA5LWJjZTEtNDk1MS05ZDJiLWY1OTFiNjM5Mjk4Zg.png) #

SDSS BOSS dataset, when viewed in Celestial Coordinates and perpendicularly to the angle dimension (aggregated by the other angle dimension), yield a stunning result.

It shows that imprinted in the Galaxy density, there are at least 36 Bangs and that we are close to the center (off by 0.1 $R_0$) of a Neutronium Acoustic Oscillation or NAO.

# The existence of 36 Bangs is inconsistent with the Big Bang Theory #

A video explaining the Big Pop and the Banging Universe Cosmogenesis is [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r54AQc2BR5c)


#Supporting Material#

[Github repository with all calculations](https://github.com/ny2292000/TheHypergeometricalUniverse)


[Self-help video to install Anaconda and the needed packages](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=04JeZ1n4qNI)


