+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}

### Context
#### Philosophy
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include philosophy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

## Idea

**"Versuch, den Begriff der negativen Grössen in die Weltweisheit einzuführen""** (1763) is a short article of [[Immanuel Kant]] concerning the philosophical foundations of the [[integer|integers]], in particular the _negative_ integers. 

## Overview

Kant argues for a sharp distinction between _logical_ and _real oppositions_: whereas the former lead to logical contradictions and the latter do not. Since he conceives logical contradictions as the simultaneous predication of a predicate $p$ and its negative $\neg p$ to the same subject $S$, a contradiction destroys the possibility of the thing represented by the subject. In contrast, in a real opposition, e.g. two forces acting in opposite directions on the same point mass, merely the effects of the opposites are cancelled without affecting their reality, i.e. the cause is still effective but its effect are covered by the effects of its opposite. As result, a gulf opens between the realm of logic with its analytic modes of reasoning and the realm of reality throwing into crisis the rationalist thought of the Leibniz-Wolffian school that maintained that in principle all truth was analytical and that denied any difference in principle between empirical and logical truths. So the distinction between logical and real oppositions gave Kant strong incentive to reconceptualize the relation between logical and empirical propositions finally leading to the distinction between formal and transcendental of his [[Critique of Pure Reason]] of 1781.

On more general grounds, Kant also recalibrates the relation between philosophy and mathematics, urging the former to modesty e.g. when it comes to deny the existence of [[infinitesimal|infinitesimals]] on metaphysical grounds.



## Related entries

* [[Immanuel Kant]]

* [[Karl Rosenkranz]]

* [[Hermann Grassmann]]

* [[transcendental ideal]]

* [[infinite judgement]]

* [[Aufhebung]]

* [[negation]]

* [[Ausdehnungslehre]]

* [[construction in philosophy]]


## References


* {#Kaestner58} Abraham Gotthelf Kästner, _Anfangsgründe der Arithmetik, Algebra, Geometrie, ebenen und sphärischen Trigonometrie, und Perspectiv_ , Göttingen 1758. ([gdz](http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/toc/?PID=PPN812429885))

* {#Wolff10} Michael Wolff, _Der Begriff des Widerspruchs - Eine Studie zur Dialektik Kants und Hegels_ , Frankfurt UP ²2010.




[[!redirects Attempt to introduce the concept of negative quantities into philosophy]]
[[!redirects concept of negative quantities]]
[[!redirects Concept of Negative Quantities]]