
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Functional analysis
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include functional analysis - contents]]
=--
#### Riemannian geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include Riemannian geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Given a [[globally hyperbolic spacetime]], the [[causal propagator]] defines a [[symplectic form]] on the [[covariant phase space]] of the [[free field|free]] [[scalar field]]. However its [[wave front set]] is too large for the would-be induced [[Moyal star product]] to exist on but a very small subalgebra of smooth functionals, due to the failure of the relevant [[products of distributions]] to exist. However the Moyal star product makes sense more generally for [[almost Kähler structures]] with a symmetric contribution added to the skew-symmetric symplectic form. 

A _Hadamard distribution_ is such a modification of the causal propagator by a symmetric component such that the resulting [[wave front set]] is just one causal half of that of the [[causal propagator]]. This allows to define the corresponding [[Moyal star product]] on the larger algebra of [[microcausal functionals]] which is large enough to contain the [[adiabatic switching|adiabatically switched]] point [[interaction]] terms $g \phi(x)^n$ (as in [[phi^4 theory]] etc.). The resulting [[algebra of observables]] is the _[[Wick algebra]]_ of the free scalar field.

The Hadamard distribution may also be thought of as the [[2-point function]] of a [[quasi-free quantum state]]. These states are therefore called _Hadamard states_.

[[!include propagators - table]]


## Definition


Recall the following general facts about the [[wave equation]]/[[Klein-Gordon equation]]

+-- {: .num_prop #PropertiesOfTheCausalPropagator}
###### Proposition
**(the causal propagator)**

Let $(X,g)$ be a [[time orientation|time-oriented]] [[globally hyperbolic spacetime]] and let $m \in \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$ (the "[[mass]]"). Then the [[Klein-Gordon equation]]

$$
  (\Box_g - m^2) \phi = 0
$$

(a [[partial differential equation]] on [[smooth functions]] $f \in C^\infty(X,\mathbb{R})$ ) has unique advanced and retarded [[Green functions]] $E^{R/A}$, namely [[continuous linear functionals]]

$$
  E^{A/R} 
   \;\colon\;
  C^\infty_c(X)
   \longrightarrow
  C^\infty(X)
$$

(from [[bump functions]] to general [[smooth functions]]) which are [[fundamental solutions]] in that 

$$
  (\Box_g - m^2) \circ E^{A/R} = \delta
  \phantom{AAAA}
  E^{A/R} \circ (\Box_g - m^2) = \delta
$$

and which have advanced/retarded [[support of a distribution]] when viewed (via the [[Schwartz kernel theorem]]) as [[distributions]] on the [[Cartesian product]] manifold $X \times X$

$$
  supp( E^{A/R}) \subset \{ (x_1, x_2) \in X \times X  \;\vert\; x_1 \in J^{\mp} (x_2) \}
 \,.
$$

In fact these two fundamental solutions are related by switching their arguments 

$$
  E^{A/R}(x_1, x_2) = E^{R/A}(x_2, x_1)
  \,.
$$

Finally their [[wave front set]] is 

$$
  WF(E^{A/R})
  \;=\;
  \left\{
   ((x_1, x_2), (k_1, -k_2))
   \;\vert\;
   x_1 \in J^{\mp}(x_2)
   \;\text{and}\;
   \left(
     (x_1, k_1) \sim (x_2, k_2)
   \right)
   \;\text{or}\;
   \left(
     (x_1 = x_2)
     \,\text{and}\,
     k_1 = -k_2
   \right)
  \right\}
  \,.
$$

Here the [[relation]] $(x_1, k_1) \sim (x_2, k_2)$ means that there exists a [[lightlike]] [[geodesic]] from $x_1$ to $x_2$ with cotangent vector $k_1$ at $x_1$ and $k_2$ at $x_2$.

It follows that the [[wave front set]] of their difference (the [[causal propagator]])

$$
  E \;\coloneqq\; E^A - E^R
$$

is 

$$
  WF(E)
  \;=\;
  \left\{
    ((x_1 x_2), (k_1, -k_2))
    \;\vert\;
    (x_1, k_1) \sim (x_2, k_2)
  \right\}
  \,.
$$


=--

+-- {: .num_defn #HadamardDistribution}
###### Definition
**(Hadamard distribution)

Let $(X,g)$ be a [[time orientation|time oriented]] [[globally hyperbolic spacetime]].

A _Hadamard 2-point function_ or _Hadamard distribution_ for the [[free field|free]] [[scalar field]] on $(X,g)$ is a [[distribution]] 

$$
  \omega \in \mathcal{D}'(X \times X)
$$

on the [[Cartesian product]] manifold such that


1. the anti-symmetric part of $\omega$ is the [[causal propagator]] $E$ (from prop. \ref{PropertiesOfTheCausalPropagator})

   $$
     \omega(x_1, x_2) - \omega(x_2, x_1)
     \;=\;
     i E(x_1, x_2)
   $$

1. (wave front set spectral condition ([Radzikowski 96, def. 6.1](#Radzikowski96)))

   the [[wave front set]] is one causal half that of the causal propagator:

   $$
     WF(\omega)
     \;=\;
     \left\{
       ((x_1, x_2), (k_1, -k_2))
       \;\vert\;
       (x_1, k_1) \simeq (x_2, k_2)
       \;\;\text{and}\;\;
       k_1 \in V_{x_1}^+
     \right\}
   $$



1. (Klein-Gordon bi-solution) $(\Box_g - m^2) \omega(-,x) = 0$ and $(\Box_g - m^2)\omega(x,-) = 0$, for all $x \in X$;


1. (positive semi-definiteness) For any complex-valued [[bump function]] $b$ we have that 

   $$
     \int_{X \times X} b^\ast(x) \omega(x,y) b(y) \, dvol(x) dvol(y)
     \;\coloneqq\;
     \langle \omega, b^\ast \otimes b \rangle 
     \;\geq\; 0 
   $$

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

Before ([Radzikowski 96](#Radzikowski96)), Hadamard distributions were characterized by their singularity structure (see ... below). In ([Kay-Wald 91](#KayWald91)) the spectrum condition in def. \ref{HadamardDistribution} was formulated, and ([Radzikowski 96](#Radzikowski96)) proved that this is equivalent to the original definition via singularity structure.

=--


## Properties

### Existence

+-- {: .num_prop #ExistenceOfHadamardDistributions}
###### Proposition
**(existence of Hadamard distributions)

Let $(X,g)$ be a [[globally hyperbolic spacetime]]. Then a [[Hadamard distribution]] $\omega$ according to def. \ref{HadamardDistribution} does exist.

It is given, up to addition by a smooth function, as the difference between the [[advanced propagator]] and the [[Feynman propagator]]
 
=--

([Radzikowski 96, above theorem 6.3 with theorem 5.1](#Radzikowski96))

In fact there exist infinitely many Hadamard distributions on any globally hyperbolic spacetime ([Junker-Schrohe 02](#JunkerSchrohe02), [Fulling-Narcowich-Wald 81](#FullingNarcowichWald81)).

## Examples

### In Minkowski spacetime

In [[Minkowski spacetime]] $\mathbb{R}^{d-1,1}$ the Hadamard distribution is given by

$$
  \omega(x,y)
  \;=\;
  \tfrac{1}{(2\pi)^{d-1}}
  \int_{\mathbb{R}^d}
  e^{i p (x-y)}
  \theta(p^0) \delta(p^2 + m^2 ) d^d p
$$

(e.g. [KM 14, equation (38) and section 3.4](#KM14))

## Related concepts

* [[causal propagator]]

* [[Feynman propagator]]


## References

The Hadamard spectrum conditon condition was first rigorously defined in 

* {#KayWald91} B. S. Kay, [[Robert Wald]], _Theorems on the uniqueness and thermal properties of stationary, nonsingular, quasifree states on spacetimes  with a bifurcate  Killing  horizon_, Phys.  Rep. 207(2), 49-136 (1991)

and shown to be equivalent to the definition in terms of singular structure in 

* {#Radzikowski96} [[Marek Radzikowski]], _Micro-local approach to the Hadamard condition in quantum field theory on curved space-time_, Commun. Math. Phys. 179 (1996), 529–553 ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104287114))

Review and further deveopments are in

* {#Hollands07} [[Stefan Hollands]], appendix D of _Renormalized Quantum Yang-Mills Fields in Curved Spacetime_, Rev. Math. Phys. 20:1033-1172, 2008 ([arXiv:0705.3340](https://arxiv.org/abs/0705.3340))

*  {#KM14} [[Igor Khavkine]], [[Valter Moretti]], _Algebraic QFT in Curved Spacetime and quasifree Hadamard states: an introduction_, Chapter 5 in [[Romeo Brunetti]] et al. (eds.) _Advances in Algebraic Quantum Field Theory_, Springer, 2015 ([arXiv:1412.5945](https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.5945))

See also

* {#JunkerSchrohe02} W. Junker and E. Schrohe: _Adiabatic vacuum states on general spacetime manifolds: Definition, construction, and physical properties_, Annales Poincare Phys. Theor. 3, 1113
(2002)

* S. A. Fulling, M. Sweeny, [[Robert Wald]], _Singularity Structure Of The Two Point Function In Quantum Field Theory In Curved Space-Time_, Commun. Math.
Phys. 63, 257 (1978).

* {#FullingNarcowichWald81} S. A. Fulling, F. J. Narcowich, [[Robert Wald]], _Singularity Structure Of The Two Point Function In Quantum Field Theory In Curved Space-Time_, Annals Phys. 136, 243 (1981), 


* Marcos Brum, [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], _"Vacuum-like" Hadamard states for quantum fields on curved spacetimes_, Classical and Quantum Gravity, Volume 31, Number 2 ([arXiv:1307.0482](https://arxiv.org/abs/1307.0482))

[[!redirects Hadamard distributions]]

[[!redirects quasi-free Hadamard state]]
[[!redirects quasi-free Hadamard states]]

[[!redirects Hadamard state]]
[[!redirects Hadamard states]]

[[!redirects Hadamard propagator]]
[[!redirects Hadamard propagators]]


[[!redirects Hadamard 2-point function]]
[[!redirects Hadamard 2-point functions]]



