
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Functional analysis
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functional analysis - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _scaling degree_ or _degree of divergence_ ([Steinmann 71](#Steinmann71)) or more generally the _degree_ ([Weinstein 78](#Weinstein78)) of a [[distribution]] on [[Cartesian space]] $\mathbb{R}^n$  is a measure for how it behaves at the origin $0 \in \mathbb{R}^n$ under rescaling $x \mapsto \lambda x$ of the canonical [[coordinates]]. 

The concept controls the problem of [[extension of distributions]] from the [[complement]] $\mathbb{R}^n \setminus \{0\}$ of the origin to all of $\mathbb{R}^n$. Such extensions are important notably in the construction of [[perturbative quantum field theories]] via [[causal perturbation theory]], where the freedom in the choice of such extensions models the [[renormalization]] freedom ("counter-terms") in the construction.


## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn #RescaledDistribution}
###### Definition
**(rescaled distribution)**

Let $n \in \mathbb{N}$. For $\lambda \in (0,\infty) \subset \mathbb{R}$ a [[positive number|positive]] [[real number]] write 

$$
  \array{ 
    \mathbb{R}^n 
      &\overset{m_\lambda}{\longrightarrow}& 
    \mathbb{R}^n
    \\
    x &\mapsto& \lambda x
  }
$$

for the [[diffeomorphism]] given by multiplication with $\lambda$, using the canonical [[real vector space]]-structure of $\mathbb{R}^n$.

Then for $u \in \mathcal{D}'(\mathbb{R}^n)$ a [[distribution]] on the [[Cartesian space]] $\mathbb{R}^n$ the _rescaled distribution_ is the [[pullback of a distribution|pullback]] of $u$ along $m_\lambda$

$$
  u_\lambda
  \coloneqq
   m_\lambda^\ast U
  \;\in\;
  \mathcal{D}'(\mathbb{R}^n)
  \,.
$$

Explicitly, this is given by

$$
  \array{
     \mathcal{D}(\mathbb{R}^n) 
       &\overset{ \langle  u_\lambda, - \rangle}{\longrightarrow}&
     \mathbb{R}
     \\
     b &\mapsto& \lambda^{-n} \langle u , b(\lambda^{-1}\cdot (-))\rangle
  }
  \,.
$$

Similarly for $X \subset \mathbb{R}^n$ an [[open subset]] which is invariant under $m_\lambda$, the rescaling of a distribution $u \in \mathcal{D}'(X)$ is is $u_\lambda \coloneqq m_\lambda^\ast u$.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #ScalingDegree}
###### Definition
**(scaling degree of a distribution)**

Let $n \in \mathbb{N}$ and let $X \subset \mathbb{R}^n$ be an [[open subset]] of [[Cartesian space]] which is invariant under $m_\lambda$ (def. \ref{RescaledDistribution}) for all $\lambda \in (0,\infty)$, and let $u \in \mathcal{D}'(X)$ be a [[distribution]] on this subset.

The _scaling degree_ of $u$ is the [[infimum]]

$$
  sd(u)
  \;\coloneqq\;
  inf
  \left\{
    \omega \in \mathbb{R}
     \;\vert\;
    \underset{\lambda \to 0}{\lim}
     \lambda^\omega u_\lambda
     = 0
  \right\}
$$

of the set of [[real numbers]] $\omega$ such that the [[limit of a sequence|limit]] of the rescaled distribution $\lambda^\omega u_\lambda$ (def. \ref{RescaledDistribution}) vanishes. If there is no such $\omega$ one sets $sd(u) \coloneqq \infty$.

The _degree of divergence_ of $u$ is the difference of the scaling degree by the [[dimension]] of the underlying space:

$$
  deg(u) \coloneqq sd(u) - n
  \,.
$$

=--


## Examples

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example
**(scaling degree of ordinary functions)**

If a distribution comes from an ordinary function $b \in C^\infty(X) \subset \mathcal{D}'(X)$, then its scaling degree (def. \ref{ScalingDegree}) is non-[[positive number|positive]]

$$
  sd(b) \leq 0
  \,.
$$

Concretely, if the first non-vanishing [[derivative]] $D^k b(0)$ of $b$ at 0 occurs as $k \in \mathbb{N}$, then the scalding degree is $-k$.

=--

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example
**(scaling degree of derivatives of delta-distibutions)**

Let $\alpha \in \mathbb{N}^n$ be a multi-index and $\delta^\alpha \in \mathcal{D}'(X)$ the corresponding [[derivatives]] of the [[delta distribution]] $\delta(0)$ [[support of a distribution|supported]] at $0$. Then the degree of divergence (def. \ref{ScalingDegree}) is the total degree the derivatives

$$
  deg( \delta^{(\alpha)}(0)) = {\vert \alpha \vert}
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

Let 

$$
  E_F(x)
  \;=\;
  \tfrac{1}{(2\pi)^n}\int_{\mathbb{R}^n} \frac{e^{i p\cdot x}}{p^2 - m^2 + i 0}
  d^n o
$$

be the [[Feynman propagator]] for the massive [[free field|free]] [[scalar field]] on $n$-dimensional [[Minkowski spacetime]] (a [[Green function]] for the [[Klein-Gordon equation]]). Its scaling degree is

$$
  sd(E_F) = n - 2
  \,.
$$

=--

([Brunetti-Fredenhagen 00, example 3 on p. 22](#BrunettiFredenhagen00))

## Properties

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Let $X \subset \mathbb{R}^n$ and $u \in \mathcal{D}'(X)$ be a [[distribution]] as in def. \ref{RescaledDistribution}, such that its scaling degree  is finite $sd(u) \lt \infty$ (def. \ref{ScalingDegree}). 

1. $sd(u \otimes v) \leq sd(u) + sd(v)$ for $v \in \mathcal{D}'(Y)$ another distribution on $Y \subset \mathbb{R}^{n'}$;

1. $deg(f u) \leq deg(u) - k$ for $f \in C^\infty(X)$ and $f^{(\alpha)}(0) = 0$ for ${\vert \alpha\vert} \leq k-1$;

1. $deg(\partial_\alpha u) \leq deg(u) + {\vert \alpha\vert}$;

1. $deg(x^\alpha u) \leq deg(u) - {\vert \alpha\vert}$.

Here $\alpha \in \mathbb{N}^n$ a multi-index.

=--

([Brunetti-Fredenhagen 00, lemma 5.1](#BrunettiFredenhagen00))


## Related concepts

* [[support of a distribution]]

* [[order of a distribution]]

## References

The concept of scaling degree is due to 

* {#Steinmann71} O. Steinmann, _Perturbation Expansions in Axiomatic Field Theory_, volume 11 of Lecture Notes in Physics, Springer, Berlin Springer Verlag, 1971.

and the more general concept of _degree_ due to

* {#Weinstein78} [[Alan Weinstein]], _The order and symbol of a distribution_, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 241, 1–54 (1978).

Review and further developments includes

* {#BrunettiFredenhagen00} [[Romeo Brunetti]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], section 5.1 of _Microlocal Analysis and Interacting Quantum Field Theories: Renormalization on Physical Backgrounds_, Commun. Math. Phys. 208 : 623-661, 2000 ([math-ph/9903028](https://arxiv.org/abs/math-ph/9903028))


* Dorothea Bahns, Michał Wrochna, _On-shell extension of distributions_ ([arXiv:1210.5448](https://arxiv.org/abs/1210.5448))




[[!redirects scaling degree of distributions]]

[[!redirects degree of divergence of a distribution]]
[[!redirects degree of divergence of distributions]]

[[!redirects degree of a distribution]]
[[!redirects degree of distributions]]
