
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebraic Quantum Field Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include AQFT and operator algebra contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[perturbative quantum field theory]] the [[algebra of observables|algebra of]] [[quantum observables]] for the [[interaction]]-term included could be called the _algebra of quantum observables on the interacting quantum fields_. Beware that often this is referred to simply as the _interacting field algebra_, by some abuse of notation.


If the [[perturbative S-matrix]] is specified, then the quantum observables on the interacting fields may be obtained by [[Bogoliubov's formula]], see there fore more.

More generally the algebra of observables on the interacting quantum fields should be defined as the [[formal deformation quantization]] (specifically [[Fedosov deformation quantization]]) of the [[interaction]] term ([Collini 16](#Collini16), [Hawkins-Rejzner 16](#HawkinsRejzner16))

## Properties




### Causal locality of interacting field quantum observables


+-- {: .num_prop #CausalLocalityOfBogoliubovFormula}
###### Proposition
**([[causal locality]])**

As the spacetime support varies, the algebras of [[interacting field quantum observables]] spanned via the Bogoliubov formula consistitute a [[causally local net of observables]], hence an instance of [[perturbative AQFT]]. 

=--

([Dütsch-Fredenhagen 00, section 3](#DuetschFredenhagen00), following [Brunetti-Fredenhagen 99, section 8](#BrunettiFredenhagen99),
[Il'in-Slavnov 78](#IlinSlavnov78))

For **[[proof]]** see [this prop.](S-matrix#PerturbativeQuantumObservablesIsLocalnet) at _[[S-matrix]]_.


## Related concepts

[[!include products in pQFT -- table]]


## References

The observation that the pertruabtive interacting field quantum observables form a [[causally local net of quantum observables]] is due to 

* {#IlinSlavnov78} V. A. Il'in and D. S. Slavnov, _Observable algebras in the S-matrix approach_, Theor. Math. Phys. 36 (1978) 32. ([spire](http://inspirehep.net/record/135575), [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01035870))

then rediscovered in

* {#BrunettiFredenhagen00} [[Romeo Brunetti]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], _Microlocal Analysis and Interacting Quantum Field Theories: Renormalization on Physical Backgrounds_, Commun. Math. Phys. 208 : 623-661, 2000 ([math-ph/9903028](https://arxiv.org/abs/math-ph/9903028))

and made more explicit in

* {#DuetschFredenhagen00} [[Michael Dütsch]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], _Algebraic Quantum Field Theory, Perturbation Theory, and the Loop Expansion_, Commun.Math.Phys. 219 (2001) 5-30 ([arXiv:hep-th/0001129](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0001129))



The observation that these algebras are the [[formal deformation quantization]] of the interacting field theory is due to

* {#Collini16} [[Giovanni Collini]], section 2.2 of _Fedosov Quantization and Perturbative Quantum Field Theory_ ([arXiv:1603.09626](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09626))


* {#HawkinsRejzner16} [[Eli Hawkins]], [[Kasia Rejzner]], _The Star Product in Interacting Quantum Field Theory_ ([arXiv:1612.09157](https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.09157))


[[!redirects quantum observable on interacting fields]]
[[!redirects quantum observables on interacting fields]]


[[!redirects interacting field quantum observable]]
[[!redirects interacting field quantum observables]]

[[!redirects interacting field algebra]]
[[!redirects interacting field algebras]]

[[!redirects interacting observable algebra]]
[[!redirects interacting observable algebras]]
