##Note##

The purpose of this entry is simply to state and prove a result of Dowker that was mentioned at [[Vietoris complex]].  Here we will look at a version of Dowker's original proof.  In later sections we will see other ways of proving it. We will also discuss some of the interpretations and applications of the result and ask about possible generalisations.



To keep the discussion fairly self contained, certain ideas will be repeated from that, and possibly other, entries.

##The two nerves of a relation: Dowker's construction##

Let $X, Y$ be sets and $R$ a relation between $X$ and $Y$, so $R
\subseteqq X \times Y$. We write $x Ry$ for $(x, y) \in R$.

+-- {: .un_example}
###### Example
(In addition to those given in [[Vietoris complex]].)

If $K$ is a [[simplicial complex]], its structure is specified by a
collection of non-empty finite subsets of its set of vertices
namely those sets of vertices declared to be simplices. This
collection of simplices is supposed to be downward closed, i.e.,
if $\sigma$ is a simplex and $\tau \subseteqq \sigma$ with $\tau \neq \emptyset$, then $\tau$
is a simplex. For our purposes here, set $X = V_K$ to be the set
of vertices of $K$ and $Y = S_K$, the set of simplices of $K$ with
$x Ry$ if $x$ is a vertex of the simplex $y$.
=--

**Returning to the general situation,** we define two [[simplicial
complex|simplicial
complexes]] associated to $R$, as follows:

1. $K = K_R:$

   * the set of vertices is the set $X$;
   * a $p$-simplex of $K$ is a set $\{x_0, \cdots, x_p\}\subseteq X$ such that there is some $y \in Y$ with $x_i Ry$ for $i = 0, 1, \cdots, p$.

2. $L = L_R :$

   * the set of vertices is the set, $Y$;
   *  $p$-simplex of $K$ is a set $\{y_0, \cdots, y_p\}\subseteq Y$ such that there is some $x \in X$ with $x Ry_j$ for $j  = 0, 1, \cdots, p$.

Clearly the two constructions are in some sense dual to each
other.

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Note

These two simplicial complexes were denoted $V(R)$ and $C(R)$ at [[Vietoris complex]].
=--

We next need some classical subdivision ideas.

###Barycentric  subdivisions###

Combinatorially, if $K$ is a simplicial complex with vertex set $V_K$,
then one associates to $K$ the partially ordered set of its
simplices. Explicitly we write $S_K$ for the set of simplices of $K$
and $(S_K, \subseteq)$ for the partially ordered set with $\subseteq$
being the obvious inclusion. The **barycentric subdivision**, $K'$, of $K$
has $S_K$ as its set of vertices and a finite set of vertices of $K'$
(i.e. simplices of $K$) is a simplex of $K'$ if it can be totally
ordered by inclusion. (Thus $K'$ is the simplicial complex given by
taking the nerve of the poset, $(S_K, \subseteq)$.)

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Note

It is important to note that there is in general _no_ natural simplicial
map from $K'$ to $K$. If however $V_K$ is ordered in such a way that
the vertices of any simplex in $K$ are totally ordered (for instance
by picking a total order on $V_K$), then one can easily specify a map
$$ \varphi : K' \rightarrow K$$
by:

* if $\sigma' = \{ x_0, \cdots, x_p\}$ is a vertex of $K'$ (so $\sigma'
\in S_K$), let $\varphi \sigma'$ be the least vertex of $\sigma'$ in
the given fixed order.

This preserves simplices, but reverses order so
if $\sigma_1' \subset \sigma_2'$ then $\varphi (\sigma_1') \geq
\varphi(\sigma_2')$.
=--

If one changes the order, then the resulting map is
_contiguous_:

##Contiguity##

 Let $\varphi,~ \psi : K \rightarrow L$ be
two simplicial maps between [[simplicial complex|simplicial complexes]]. They are **contiguous** if for any simplex $\sigma$ of $K$, $\varphi (\sigma) \cup \psi
(\sigma)$ forms a simplex in $L$.


Contiguity gives a constructive form of homotopy applicable to
simplicial maps.

If $\psi : K \rightarrow L$ is a simplicial map, then it induces
$\psi' : K' \rightarrow L'$ after subdivision. As there is no way
of knowing / picking compatible orders on $V_K$ and $V_L$ in
advance, we get that on constructing

$$\varphi_K : K' \rightarrow K$$

and

$$\varphi_L : L' \rightarrow L$$

that $\varphi_L \psi'$ and $\psi \varphi_K$ will be contiguous to each
other but rarely equal.

**Returning to $K_R$ and $L_R$,** we order the elements of $X$ and
$Y$. Then suppose $y'$ is a vertex of $L'_R$, so $y' = \{y_0,
\cdots, y_p\}$, a simplex of $L_R$ and there is an element $x \in
X$ with $x Ry_i, i = 0, 1, \cdots, p$. Set $\psi y' = x$ for one
such $x$.

If $\sigma = \{ y'_0, \cdots, y'_q\}$ is a $q$-simplex of $L'_R$,
assume $y'_0$ is its least vertex (in the inclusion ordering)

$$\varphi_L (y^\prime_0) \in y'_0 \subset y^\prime  for each  y_i \in
\sigma$$

hence $\psi y'_i R \varphi_L (y'_0)$ and the elements $\psi y'_0,
\cdots, \psi y'_q$ form a simplex in $K_R$, so $\psi : L'_R
\rightarrow K_R$ is a simplicial map. It, of course, depends on the
ordering used and on the choice of $x$,  but any other choice $\bar x$
for $\psi y'$ gives a contiguous map.

Reversing the roles of $X$ and $Y$ in the above we get a
simplicial map

$$\bar\psi : K_R' \rightarrow L_R.$$

Applying barycentric subdivisions again gives

$$\bar\psi' : K_R'' \rightarrow L_R'$$

and composing with $\psi : L_R' \rightarrow K_R$ gives a map

$$\psi \bar\psi' : K_R'' \rightarrow K_R.$$

Of course, there is also a map

$$\varphi_K \varphi'_K : K_R''\rightarrow K_R.$$

+-- {: .un_proposition}
###### Proposition (Dowker, 1952, p.88). 

The two maps $\varphi_K \varphi'_K$ and $\psi \bar\psi'$ are contiguous.
=--

Before proving this, note that contiguity implies homotopy and that
$\varphi \varphi'$ is homotopic to the identity map on $K_R$ after
realisation, i.e., this proves the following modulo the proof of the proposition:

+-- {: .un_theorem}
######Dowker's Theorem 

$|K_R| \simeq |L_R|.$
=--


The homotopy depends on the ordering of the vertices and so is not
natural. 

+-- {: .proof}

######Proof of Proposition

Let $\sigma''' = \{ x_0'', x_1'', \cdots, x_q''\}$ be a simplex of
$K_R''$ and as usual assume $x_0''$ is its least vertex, then for all
$i \gt 0$

$$x_0'' \subset x_i''.$$

We have that $\varphi'_K$ is clearly order reversing so $\varphi'_K
x_i'' \subseteq \varphi'_K x_0''$. Let $y = \bar\varphi \varphi'_K
x_0''$, then for each $x \in \varphi'_K x_0''$, $x Ry$. Since $\varphi_K
\varphi'_K x_i'' \in \varphi'_K x_i'' \subseteq \varphi'_K x_0''$, we
have $\varphi_K \varphi'_K x_i'' Ry$.

For each vertex $x'$ of $x_i'', \bar \psi x' \in \bar \psi'
x_i''$, hence as $\varphi'_K x_0'' \in x_0'' \subset x_i'', y =
\bar \psi \varphi'_K xx_0'' \in \bar \psi' x_i''$ for each $x_i
''$, so for each $x_i'', \psi \bar \psi' x_i'' Ry$, however we
therefore have 

$$ \varphi_k \varphi'_K (\sigma '') \cup \psi \bar \psi (\sigma''') = \bigcup \varphi_k \varphi'_K (x_i'')\cup \psi \bar \psi; x_i ''$$ 

forms a simplex in $K_R$, i.e.
$\varphi_K \varphi'_K$ and $\psi \bar \psi'$ are contiguous.

=--

###References

*  C. H. Dowker, _Homology Groups of Relations_, Annals of Maths, 56, (1952), 84–95.


[[!redirects Dowker's theorem]]
[[!redirects Dowker’s Theorem]]
[[!redirects Dowker’s theorem]]