##Tentative##

If [[group cohomology]] studies morphism between [[Eilenberg-MacLane object]]s /[[Eilenberg-MacLane space|spaces]] $[K(A, n), K(B, m)]$, usually in the case $n = 1$, one might imagine **group homotopy** would study $[M(A, n), M(B, m)]$, especially for $m = 1$, where the $M(A, n)$ are [[Moore space|Moore spaces]]. (Or should we take co-Moore spaces?)

One difference is that $K(G, 1)$ is defined for nonabelian $G$, whereas $M(G, 1)$ is only defined for abelian $G$. 

+-- {: .query}

[[David Corfield]]: An asymmetry in the structure and co-structure of the circle? $S^1$ is both $K(\mathbb{Z}, 1)$ and $M(\mathbb{Z}, 1)$, and supports an abelian group structure but a nonabelian [[cogroup]] structure, so first cohomology must be abelian, but not necessarily first homotopy.

[[Urs Schreiber]]: might it be more an asymmetry in the definition: since [[Moore space]] involves [[homology]] which is (in the sense described there) the _abelian_ version of [[homotopy]].

[[David Corfield]]: some people, e.g., Hatcher, talk of homotopy with coefficients as probing spaces with co-Moore spaces, based on cohomology, so I'm not sure if your point is right. The ordinary homotopy groups come from maps out of co-Moore spaces for $G = \mathbb{Z}$, i.e., the spheres. These are all cogroups, but not abelian in the case of the 1-sphere. Cohomology groups come from mapping into E-M spaces. In the case of $K(\mathbb{Z}, 1)$ we again have the circle, but this time it supports an abelian group. I guess $K(\mathbb{Z}, 1)$ comes from forming loop spaces from above, higher $n$, so will be abelian, whereas $M(\mathbb{Z}, 1)$ comes from suspending from below, and only goes abelian at the second stage.

=--



According to Baues, the groups $[M(A, n), M(B, m)]$ are not at all understood. This is clear, since for $A = B = \mathbb{Z}$, these are the homotopy groups of the spheres.

>Need to say something about homology decomposition and homotopy decomposition (see Baues, <a href="http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=xoM5DxQZihQC">Homotopy Types</a>. Homology decomposition fails to be natural, but Baues introduces 'boundary invariants' which are natural.