

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebraic Quantum Field Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include AQFT and operator algebra contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[perturbative quantum field theory]] the _Stückelberg-Petermann renormalization group_ ([Stückelberg-Petermann 53](#StiecelbergPetermann53)) is the incarnation of the [[renormalization]] [[group]] in the perspective of [[causal perturbation theory]]: It is a group of formal deformation of [[interaction]] [[Lagrangian densities]] which is such that any two choices of [[renormalization|renormalized]] perturbative [[S-matrices]] differ by precomposition with a unique group element. This is the statement of the [[main theorem of perturbative renormalization]].

A priori the Stückelberg-Petermann renormalization group is not related to [[scale transformation]] but a relation exists ([Gell-Mann & Low 54](#GellMannLow54), [Brunetti-Dütsch-Fredenhagen 09](#BrunettiDuetschFredenhagen09)) for review see ([Dütsch 18, section 3.5.3](#Duetsch18)).

## Related cocepts

* [[main theorem of perturbative renormalization]]

## References

The original article is

* {#StueckelbergPetermann53} [[Ernst Stückelberg]] and A. Petermann, _La normalisation des constantes dans la theorie des quanta_, Helv. Phys. Acta 26 (1953), 499–520

The relation to [[scale transformation]] is due to

* {#GellMannLow54} [[Murray Gell-Mann]] and F. E. Low, _Quantum Electrodynamics at Small Distances-, Phys. Rev. 95 (5) (1954), 1300–1312

* {#BrunettiDuetschFredenhagen09} [[Romeo Brunetti]], [[Michael Dütsch]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], _Perturbative Algebraic Quantum Field Theory and the Renormalization Groups_, Adv. Theor. Math. Physics 13 (2009), 1541-1599 ([arXiv:0901.2038](https://arxiv.org/abs/0901.2038))

Review includes

* {#Duetsch18} [[Michael Dütsch]], section 3.5.1 of _[[From classical field theory
to perturbative quantum field theory]]_, 2018


See also

* {#Duetschfredenhagen07} [[Michael Dütsch]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], _Action Ward Identity and the Stückelberg-Petermann renormalization group_, Prog. Math. 251:113-124,2007



[[!redirects Stueckelberg-Pe]]