#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea
A surreal space is essentially the space of [[surreal numbers]]; it can be seen as a [[vector space]] over any given surreal number [[field]].  The arithmetic properties of the surreals of course follow suit in this space such that the scalars of this vector space are under the field operations of surreal numbers. We denote the surreal space as $\mathbf{S}^n$. Any given real vector space $\mathbb{R}^m$ is by default a [[subspace]]. In a sense, $\mathbf{S}^n$ is a [[module]] over a field of [[real numbers]]. 

## Construction

Given $\mathbf{S}^n$ $\supset$ $\mathbb{R}^m$ there exists the category of modules in the former that distribute over the latter. We write ${SMod}$ for it. 

+-- {: .num_definition}
###### Definition

${SMod}$ is a [[module over an enriched category]]. 

From the definition of vector spaces we have 
$$
  Vect_S \coloneqq SMod
  \,.$$
$$SMod \supset \mathbb{R}Mod$$
The surreal numbers naturally are an enriched category over the reals given that the elements of the category ${Sur}$ are elements of [[Hom]] contained within ${Real}$. 
=--

The category of real modules is a subcategory of the category of surreal modules.

###Surreal space as a projective space

Every [[ordered field]] can be hypothetically embedded within the surreals. Now given this, we can say that for a drawn line of surreal numbers we have that it is in a sense a [[projective line]]. More specifically, if say you have the field of real numbers $\mathbb{R}$ microscopically embedded within $\mathbf{S}^n$ and given a disjoint union of $\mathbb{R}$ and $(\infty)$, the latter of which is contained within the surreals as they contain the infinite numbers, we have a one-point compactification for any given union for a subfield of reals and a collection of infinite numbers. This makes every surreal line a special kind of projective line. This connection leads us to seeing that the asymptotic collection of real-valued functions is contained within $obj({Sur})$.

This practice can also have any surreal space in general act as a projective space of reals. However, we must keep in mind that there is much more to it than just that. We also now have a way to describe the asymptotic behavior of real-valued functions through this. And on top of that, these projective spaces of real numbers are merely special subsets, not the whole deal itself. 

Surreal space (denoted as $\mathbf{S}^n$) can be seen as a [[topologically enriched category]] of a real space $\mathbb{R}^m$. We write ${Sur}$ to denote it. Its objects are all the infinitely near points of $\mathbb{R}^m$, and all vector spaces over ordered fields. In fact, ${Sur}$ is a vector space over the reals. It is an equivalence relation acting on the reals and forms enriched modules over them. Given the concept of a topological space blended with this notion we thus have a ringed space. Kruskal demonstrated that the surreals describe the asymptotic behavior of the reals. From this we can see this as part of the objects in ${Sur}$. 





## Genetic spaces, schemes, and surreal curves
Starting from page 5 of [Salzedo], Definition 6, the discussion of the topology of surreal numbers begin. We can take this conception and graduate it towards surreal spaces. One notable thing is the genetic construction of polynomials on page 7. This would mean each and every surreal polynomial is a real algebraic scheme. Or more precisely in motivic terms a surreal space is a category of correspondences of real algebraic cycles.

It is from here we can define polynomials over surreal spaces. Zeroes of polynomials over these surreal polynomials is analogous to projective schemes in a real space. A genetic space is a space in which [[ringed spaces]] can be related with genetic formulas. The surreal curve is defined as a surreal space of dimension one. Genetic spaces are essentially real algebraic cycles of schemes. 

Adjoin any given ring to a surreal space and you thus have a ringed space. For any given polynomial, each may be constructed through the use of genetic formulas. Equipped with a locally real asymptotic real sheaf structure we can thus define the category of real algebraic correspondences. 

###Infinitely blown up space

### Vector Bundles as elements of surreal space
The union of all projectivized vector bundles in a real space is a point in surreal space. 
### Motivic meaning

### Genetic transformations

### Polynomial inequalities 

## Motivic surreal spaces
The [[sheaf cohomology]] on a surreal space is equivalent to a [[motivic cohomology]] of real algebraic cycles. ${Sur}$ contains real motives. 

## Quasi-categorical framework
Certain tools can be used to show the quasi-categorical format of surreal spaces. A surreal space is a topos over the reals. 

## Translations and transformations on surreal spaces

## Asymptotic Parts of Real Numbers (Asymptotic Numbers)
We use sheaves to discuss this. 

## Ordinal, Simplicial, and Surreal (Genealogical cohomology) 

## Universal algebraic definition

## Supercomplex Spaces
## References
* [AS] Simon Rubinstein-Salzedo and Ashvin A. Swaminathan, _Analysis on Surreal Numbers_, Journal of Logic and Analysis, [arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/1307.7392)