[[!include contents]]


#Idea#

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Origin

Category theory was introduced by Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane in the 1945 paper **General theory of natural equivalences**. The reason for introducing [[category|categories]] was to introduce [[functor]]s, and the reason for introducing functors was to introduce [[natural transformation]]s (more specifically natural equivalences) in order to define what _natural_ means in mathematics. 

The paper was a clash of ideas from abstract [[algebra]] (Mac Lane) and [[topology]]/[[homotopy theory]] (Eilenberg). It was first rejected on the ground that it had no content but was later published. Unexpectedly category theory has flourished into almost all areas of mathematics, has found many applications outside mathematics and even attempts to build a [[foundations]] of mathematics. 
=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Paradigm

The basic idea of category theory is to shift attention from the study of [[object]]s to the study of _maps_ or _relations_ between objects: of (homo)[[morphism]]s between objects. 
=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Examples

The archetypical example of a category is the category [[Set]] of [[set]]s and functions between sets. 

The classical examples of categories are [[concrete category|concrete categories]] whose [[object]]s are [[stuff, structure, property|sets with extra structure]] and whose [[morphism]]s are structure preserving functions of sets, such as [[Top]], [[Grp]], [[Vect]].  These are the examples from which the term _category_ derives: these categories literally _categorize_ mathematical structures by packing structures of the same _type_ (same category) and structure preserving mappings between them into a single whole structure, a category.

But by far not all categories are of this type and categories are much more versatile than these classical examples suggest. After all, a [[category]] is just a [[directed graph]] with a notion of composition of its edges. As such it generalizes the concept of [[monoid]]. If the category is a [[groupoid]] it generalizes the concept of [[group]] (in a sense called [[horizontal categorification]]). 

Archetypical examples of non-[[concrete category|concrete]] categories are the [[fundamental groupoid]] of a [[topological space]] and the [[fundamental category]] of a [[directed space]]. 
=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Category theory pointing beyond itself

These latter examples already pave the way to the [[homotopy hypothesis]], to the unification between category theory and [[homotopy theory]] in [[Higher Topos Theory|(infinity,1)-category theory]] and thereby to [[higher category theory]]. 
=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Conceptual unification

One major driving force behind the development of category theory is its ability to abstract and unify concepts. General statements about categories apply to each specific [[concrete category]] of mathematical structures. The general notion of [[universal construction]]s in categories, such as [[representable functor]]s, [[adjoint functor]]s  and [[limit]]s, turns out to prevail throughout mathematics and manifest itself in myriads of special examples.
=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Abstract nonsense

This abstraction power of category theory has traditionally caused different feelings about it. The popular term _abstract nonsense_ for category theoretic methods was meant pejoratively but is often used by now just as descriptively as in: "This property is not specific to this context, it already follows from abstract nonsense".

In the preface of his 1965 book _Theory of Categories_ Barry Mitchell writes:

>A number of sophisticated people tend to disparage category theory as consistently as others disparage certain kinds of classical music. When obliged to speak of a category they do so in an apologetic tone, similar to the way some say, "It was a gift – I’ve never even played it" when a record of Chopin Nocturnes is discovered in their possession. For this reason I add to the usual prerequisite that the reader have a fair amount of mathematical sophistication, the further prerequisite that he have no other kind.
=--


#What is category theory?#

**Category theory** is so useful because it can be seen from so many perspectives.

* The theory of [[category|categories]] as [[essentially algebraic theory|essentially algebraic structures]] with several objects and a relation (morphism) "algebra" on these objects. Structures in ordinary [[algebraic theory|abstract algebra]], like [[monoid|monoids]], have only one object. This theory also include [[functors]] between categories and [[natural transformation|natural transformations]].

* The theory of categories as 1D primitive mathematical [[universe]]s or [[space]]s (nothing as fancy as a [[topos]]). As a space, a category is a [[simplicial set]] such that the [[Segal map]]s are isomorphisms. The simplicial set is the [[nerve]] of the category.
  +-- {: .query}

  Rafael: Preferrably as some 1D CW-complex that i am trying to figure out. Can someone fill that in.

  _Urs Schreiber_: could you give more details? I don’t see yet what you mean here.

  _John Baez_: since a 1d CW complex is just a graph, I bet he’s noting that categories are just graphs with extra structure. But be a little careful: categories are directed graphs with extra structure, while 1d CD complexes are undirected graphs.

  _Rafael_: Sometimes i need to rest but i will slowly get back to write online now. I remember a description of a category as some CW-complex flashing by in google. Of cause you should not trust everything you find by google, but unfortunately i can't give more details since i can't find it again. The idea is to make this definition of a category as a space more mathematically precise. 

  As i pointed out in the various definitions of a category theory a category is a directed multigraph with a composition law. This is not new for me. It is a good point there that CW-complexes are undirected :)
  So a directed 1D CW-complex (whatever that is) is closer. Therefore other ways to define it as a space might be more natural. The point is that i don't see graphs as spaces (perhaps i should) and i wish to define a category as a space.

  _Toby_:  I\'d say that you should see a graph as a space for *one* facet of a graph, just as you are trying to do here for *one* facet of a category.  (^_^)

  _Rafael_: I have it. :)

  [[Urs Schreiber]]: there are several different ways that "categories are spaces". I think what you are thinking of now is how to characterize simplicial sets that are nerves of categories. But notice that when you think of the simplicial set as a [[topological space]] that means turning the category it came from into an $\infty$-groupoid, so is not really the original category anymore but something different.

  By the way the link to [[universe]] takes one to [[Grothendieck universe]]. That does not seem to make sense to me in this context here.

  Another by the way: the characterization theorem of simplicial sets that are nerves of categories is given at [[nerve]]. Maybe the paragraph above that we are talking about here should just read as follows:

    * Categories can be conceived as [[simplicial set]]s with a special [[stuff, structure, property|property]]. This property is described at [[nerve]], since simplicial sets that have this property are called [[nerve]]s of categories. 

  This description is useful in that it opens a useful road to [[higher category theory]] in terms of [[geometric definition of higher category]]. Generally, a [[simplicial model for weak omega-categories]] is a characterization of [[simplicial set]]s with certain properties that generalize those of [[nerve]]s of ordinary categories.

  This is particularly well known for the case that the higher categories in question are [[infinity-groupoid]]s. These are modeled by simplicial sets that have the property that they are [[Kan complex]]es.

  That would be a suggestion. I must say I don't feel that the sentence "The theory of categories as primitive mathematical universes or spaces (nothing as fancy as a topos)." tells me anything. I'd suggest to either remove it completely or figure out what it means to say and then say it in somewhat different words.

  [[David Roberts]]: I think the constrast needs to be made between small categories, which are models for homotopy types, and categories which are to be considered ambient categories, like topoi, [[exact category|Barr-exact categories]], $(\infty,1)$-categories and so on. This is probably what Rafael means, but the juxtaposition in the sentence is slightly confusing. In fact, I've put a bit in about Grothendieck's views on small categories.

  [[Urs Schreiber]]: concerning homotopy types: yes, so that's what I tried to say: while a category _models_ a homotopy type, it can't really be identified with that. Many different categories model a given homotopy type. In fact, already all [[poset]]s model all homotopy types in this sense (namely in the sense that all homotopy types are obtained as [[geometric realization]]s of [[nerve]]s of them). 

  On David's other comment: tt is a good point that for practical purposes we may want to distinguish on which level of self-reflection of category theory we are speaking. Do we have a single $\infty$-category that happens to be used as a model for a homotopy type, or do we happen to consider an $\infty$-category of "all" $\infty$-categories of such sorts (or do we go even further).

  I'd think we need to hear back from Rafael a comment describing a bit more in words what the _intention_ of the above paragraph is. Then I would feel free to implement my suggestion for how one could phrase it.

  _Rafael_: Toby, a graph would be a too strange space. There are no rules how you can go (travel) between points in that space.

  Urs, i am not thinking of a simplicial sets as topological spaces. Just to start, what is an open subset of a simplicial set? To turn it into a set and then a topological space would require to apply the geometric realization functor |.|. Up to categorical equivalence nothing is lost in passing to the nerve which is a category and a special simplicial set (not a topological space). Further, the description is so short so there is no reason to refer to the nerve page. If someone has a better "definition" of a category as a space i would be happy to hear it.

  This point in the list is very important, it tells that categories have a geometry. You may think of them as geometric objects and not only algebraic objects.
Oversimplified, you can draw a category on paper instead of dealing with sets of objects, morphism, etc.

  This is what i mean by a primitive space. A collection of points with paths between the points on which you can move between the points in the primitive space. Since motion is directed the paths will be directed. I hope this helps. You might add that to this point in the list if you like.

  You also talk about identifying, this could mena many things. Identical in all respects, there exist a bijection, there exist an invertible functor,... 

  This reminds me of identifying (by bijection) points of sets with functions. I could accept it but it is like saying that i can use the fundamental forces of nature instead of my arms and legs just because both happen to be 4. I can then induce everything else on the forces from my arms and legs afterwards but it don't make sense. Something (everything) got lost in the translation. To end, i still claim that identifying the nerve of a category with a category is good enough (for small categories). No one seem to have objected to identify categories with for instance presheaves (i will work more on that).

  David, you do have a point there, this nerve only works for small categories. I don't know how to fix it to work with large categories yet. Is it an unsolved problem?

  I have taken the liberty to reformulate what you have written, hope you like it. It is more stright on.
Now i only wish i knew more about fundamental localizers to write more.

  Regarding Grothendieck universes. A Grothendieck universe contains what may be called the small sets in a set theory such as ZFC. Having an axiom that forces every set to be an element of some Grothendieck universe eliminate such sets as the set of all sets and the following paradoxes. Grothendieck was the first to see and formulate this in SGA in 1972. But i am no expert on this. I have not read the whole aricle on Grothendick universes. I wonder what Urs had in mind.

  References are: first part of first chapter of first volume of "Handbook of categorical algebra" - Borceux and "One universe as a foundation for category theory" - Mac Lane 1969. "Categories and sheaves" - Kashivara-Schapira do also mention briefly universes at the beginning.

  _Toby_:  The way that topologists think of a graph as a space is as a CW complex.  Each edge is modelled by a copy of the unit interval $[0,1]$ (which way doesn\'t matter up to homeomorphism), and each vertex is modelled by a single point, which is then identified with the appropriate endpoint of each edge interval that touches it.  (And if you want to be constructive, do a little completing here, but that\'s not important.)  Of course, this is all very much like taking the geometric realisation of a simplicial set, and it does not lose any information if you are talking about an undirected graph (even multipseudograph).

  If you have a specific reference, with page number, for your vision of a category as a space, I would like to see it.  I mean, I\'ve read Borceux, but I don\'t remember anything like this (I\'ll check again).  Is it just a matter of visualisation?, or something more rigorous?  If the former, then I think that I understand what you mean, but I\'m not getting the latter.

  _Rafael_: So you made a category into a space, now any topology on it will make it into a topological space. But the point was to still have a category and not a set with a topology. Anyway, i forgot two fundamental points. The points must all be of the same type! and the paths between two points must form a set (so there are not too many ways to move from one point to another) and nothing bigger. I did see it as a visualization but i am convinced it can, at least for smal categories, be made rigorous. And technically for smal categories it is nothing wrong to pass to their nerve. While others may prefer it as a characterization. I have a vague memory of one reference: The tale of n-categories, but quickly searching there for space gave nothing. It is there that i read that the Hom's must not be larger than sets.
  =--
* A theory of models for homotopy types. In [[Alexander Grothendieck|Grothendieck's]] approach to homotopy theory he called $Cat$ together with the class of functors that induced weak equivalences on nerves a [[fundamental localizer]]. See [[the homotopy theory of Grothendieck]].
* A unifying tool and language in [[mathematics]].
* An organizational tool in [[mathematics]].
* A new [[foundations|foundation of mathematics]] that focuses attention on structural issues and away from how mathematical objects are 'built up' as sets.
* An abstraction of an abstraction of an abstraction of .... The first level is [[set]]s and is most concrete. This is abstracted to categories (only some categories are categories of sets, hence the abstraction). The next abstraction is to categories of categories or more generally $2$-[[2-category|categories]]. This can be iterated to $n$-[[n-category|categories]] and [[infinity-category|indefinitely]]. This could be called the theory of abstractions.
* A description of partial [[symmetry|symmetries]], in the sense that [[group]]s describe symmetries.
* A generalized theory of [[representations]]. In this view every functor is a representation of its domain in its codomain and natural transformations are the [[intertwining operator]]s between representations.
* The theory of [[directed graph|directed multipsuedographs]] with a [[composition]] law and identity loops. This has given rise to the heavy use of diagrams in category theory.
* A theory of [[type theory|type theories]]. There is a bijection between categories and type theories.
* A theory of [[deductive system]]s. There is a bijection between categories and deductive systems.
* A theory of [[presheaves]] with some properties on the full subcategory $[0] \overset{\rightarrow}{\underset{\rightarrow}\leftarrow} [1] \overset{\rightarrow}{\underset{\rightarrow}{\overset{\leftarrow}{\underset{\leftarrow}\rightarrow}}} [2]$ of $\Delta$.
* A theory of [[Cat]], the $2$-[[2-category|category]] of categories. This is axiomatized in Lawvere\'s [[ETAC]].

Some would define category theory as the human activity of [category theorists](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/list/people).


#Branches of category theory#

A probably incomplete list is:

* Pure category theory (vaguely category theory without the use of any other branches of mathematics except essential concepts from them).
* Categorical abstract algebra, including [[representation theory]] of abstract algebraic structures and [[universal algebra]].
* [[homological algebra|Homological algebra]].
* [[homotopical algebra|Homotopical algebra]].
* Topology using categories. It includes [[algebraic topology]], [[categorical topology]] (see [[topological concrete category]] for a bit of this), [[quantum topology]], [[low-dimensional topology]].
* [[internal logic|Categorical logic]] and [[set theory]] in the category-theoretic context such as [[algebraic set theory]].
* [[foundations|Foundations]] of mathematics building on categories, for instance [[topos theory]].
* Abstract [[geometry]], including [[algebraic geometry]] on the level of schemes and above, categorical [[noncommutative geometry]], different categorifications of [[differential geometry]], etc. 
* [[categorical quantization|Categorical quantization]] (in mathematics).
* [[applied category theory|Applied category theory]]. Especially to mathematical [[physics]], [[computer science]] and [[dynamic system]]s (categorical dynamics).

Most of these include some [[higher category theory]].

An imperfect perspective of category theory (for the purpose of classifying articles) can be obtained from the [MSC subject classification (18-XX)](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet/msc/msc.html?t=18-XX); the current one is from 2000 and reflects ideas of the decade before that.

#Main principle of category theory#
Category theory has a main principle:

_In any category it is unnatural and undesirable to speak about equality of two objects_.

For the theorem accepted as the fundamental theorem of category theory see the [[Yoneda lemma]].

#Contrast with set theory#
Here set theory is assumed to be a theory of the usual concept of sets, that is *material* [[set theory]].

No one of these is more fundamental than the other. Category theory is a holistic (structural) approach to mathematics that can (through such methods as Lawvere\'s [[ETCS]]) provide [[foundations]] of mathematics and (through [[algebraic set theory]]) reproduce all the different axiomatic set theories; elementary category theory does not need the concept of set to be formulated. Set theory is an analytic approach (element-wise) and can reproduce category theory by simply defining all the concepts in the usual way, as long as one include a technique to handle large categories (for instance by using [[class]]es instead of sets, or by including as an axiom that an uncountable [[inaccessible cardinal]] exists or even that [[Grothendieck universe]]s exist). Lawvere pointed out that set theory is axiomatized by a binary membership relation while category theory is axiomatized by a ternary composition relation.

|Set theory| |Category theory|
|----------|-|---------------|
|membership relation| |-|
|sets| |categories|
|elements| |objects|
|-| |morphisms|
|functions| |functors|
|equations between elements| |isomorphisms between objects|
|equations between sets| |equivalences between categories|
|equations between functions| |natural transformations between functors|

The process of going from sets to categories is called categorification and is a functor $Set \rightarrow Cat$, and the reverse process is called decategorification.

For more on this and for the many different generalized sets see

* Sets, categories and structuralism - Costas Drossos

#Other categorical structures#

These are often seen as a part of category theory even if they are only related to categories.

* [[allegory|Allegories]]

#Applied category theory#

Just to show that category theory has applications a subset of the set of applications is:

* [[categorical physics|Categorical physics]] (ex: categorical spacetime in quantum gravity, the category of elementary particles and particle interactions)
* Categories in [[computer science]] (ex: data types, artificial intelligence)
* [[categorical dynamics|Categorical dynamics]]
* Neural networks
* Psychology (ex: perception, cognition, consciousness, teaching, knowledge)
* Chemistry (the category of chemical elements and chemical reactions)
* Nuclear physics (the category of atomic nuclei and nuclear reactions, graphical calculus for spin)
* Biology (ex: detecting life)
* Linguistics
* Philosophy
* Music

#References#

Category theory textbooks for which the $n$Lab currently provides detailed linked indexes are

* Kashiwara and Schapira, [[Categories and Sheaves]].

* Ieke Moerdijk and Saunders Mac Lane, [[Sheaves in Geometry and Logic]]

Other standard references include:

* Saunders Mac Lane, [[Categories Work|Categories for the working mathematician]], 2nd ed. 
* Steve Awodey, Categories for everybody. 
* Francis Borceux, Handbook of categorical algebra, vol 1--3. 
* Colin McLarty, Elementary categories, elementary toposes. 
* Jiri Adamek, Horst Herrlich, and George Strecker, Abstract and concrete categories -- the joy of cats. [free online](http://katmat.math.uni-bremen.de/acc/acc.pdf)
* Michael Barr and Charles Wells,
Toposes, triples and theories. [free online](http://www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/pub/ttt.html)
* Robert Goldblatt, Topoi, the categorial analysis of logic.
[free online](http://historical.library.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/cul.math/docviewer?did=Gold010&amp;seq=&amp;view=50&amp;frames=0&amp;pagenum=1)
* Tom Leinster, Higher operads, higher categories [free online] (http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/math/pdf/0305/0305049v1.pdf)
* Eugenia Cheng, Aaron Lauda, Higher-dimensional categories - an illustrated guide book [free online] (http://cheng.staff.shef.ac.uk/guidebook/guidebook-new.pdf)
* Peter Johnstone, Topos theory
* Jacob Lurie, Higher topos theory [free online] (http://www-math.mit.edu/~lurie/papers/highertopoi.pdf)
* Project description - higher categorical structures and their applications [free online] (http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/NCATS/ForWeb.pdf)

[[!redirects abstract nonsense]]
[[!redirects general abstract nonsense]]
[[!redirects applied category theory]]