+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
#### Additive analytic geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include Additive analytic geometry -- contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}



## Idea

Additive analytic geometry over the [[complex number]] is an analog of classical (multiplicative) [[complex analytic geometry]] obtained by replacing the convolution algebra $\ell^1(\N,\C)$ of converging power series of radius $1$ (discrete [[Mellin transforms]]) by the algebra $L^1(\R_+,\C)$ of integrable functions (continuous Mellin transforms).
The analog of the complex unit disc $D_m(0,1)=D(0,1)$ is the hyperbolic/additive unit disc
$$D_a(-\infty,0)=\{s,Re(s)\leq 0\}\cup \{-\infty\},$$
and the analog of the affine line $A^1_m=\C$ is the additive affine line
$$A^1_a=\{-\infty\}\cup \C.$$
The main interest of this new geometry is that it has a built in flow (action of $\R_+$ on itself) and its functions are locally given by continuous Mellin transforms.

One needs to use [[Dirac distribution|Dirac measures/distributions]] to relate directly the above two types of analytic geometries, by the relation on coordinates given by $z=e^s$ in an [[archimedean]] context, and $z=p^{-s}$ in a [[non-archimedean]] context.

Higher dimensional spaces may also be considered.
A full complex geometry with various topologies seems to emerge from these simple considerations.

Additive analytic geometry also has a non-commutative and automorphic extension
(formulated in spectral terms), that may be useful to study and formulate some problems of automorphic representation theory in a geometric context. For example, the results of Godement and Jacquet looks like a kind of pasting of two ``Mellin automorphic spectra'' along the usual automorphic spectrum, in this context.

## A simple example

It is easy to paste two additive unit discs along their boundary $\R$,
that is the spectrum of $L^1(\R)$, to get the additive version of
the projective space $P^1_a(\C)=\{-\infty\}\cup \C\cup \{+\infty\}$ and
the exponential map sends $P^1_a(\C)$ to the usual (multiplicative) projective space $P^1(\C)$. One may also paste two different discs along an annulus.

More generally, if $f$ is an additive analytic function defined of an additive disc, and if it may be extended to $P^1_a(\C)$ using a functional equation, then the complement of its set $S$ of zeroes gives an open subspace $U$ of the additive projective space. In good situations, this gives an additive subspace that is equipped with the given flow, and its embedding into projective space induces an identification between the associated additive de Rham cohomology spaces in degree $0$ and $2$. The Poincaré group of this space is generated by looping around each of the given points in the set $S$, that may be infinite.

## Additive Hodge theory

One may develop an analog of [[Hodge theory]] in this context (working with real analytic additive functions in the $s$ and $\bar{s}$ coordinates, and the corresponding analog of the Laplacian; the formal theory with [[Sobolev spaces]] seems to carry through to this context). This will not give finite dimensionality of [[de Rham cohomology]], because of the above remark on the Poincaré group. However, such a Hodge theory may still have interesting applications related to its interaction with additive Poincaré duality, since, in good cases, all the given construction are compatible with the given flow.




