
See also closely related entry [[integral]].


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


...

## Idea

#### Generalizing sum

Integration is a process involved in defining or computing [[integral]]s which are various generalizations of sums to more general ranges and distributions over them. 

#### Opposite to differentiation

Many integrals are supposed to be inverse to differentiation procedures of various kinds. Indeed, if integral is a generalization of a sum, then a difference between two partial sums is a value to be added at a step of summation, and its generalization is some sort of differentiation. Of course, the initial value has to be determined as the differentiation gives just a step of the addition.

#### Solving differential equations and constraints

In some cases, one solves a differential equation by reducing it to a relation of the form $d F = g$ and then $F = \int g$. One says that the equation is
solvable in quadratures. Thus the integration is used in examples of solving differential equations and differential relations, hence finding objects satisfying some differential constraints is often also considered a sort of integration. For example, finding integral curves of vector fields and more generally finding integral submanifolds of distributions, is also called an integration. In this vain, also a Lie group is a global object which integrates a Lie algebra (indeed, infinitesimally this reduces to solving the Maurer-Cartan equations). For resolving differential relations there are solvability conditions/obstructions/constraints which are often of cohomological nature. There is sometimes a relation to [[rational homotopy theory]].

## Related entries

* in [[measure theory]]:

  * [[measurable space]]
   
  * [[measure space]]
* [[fiber integration]]

* in [[differential geometry]]

  *  [[differential form]]

  *  [[integration over supermanifolds]]

*  in [[supergeometry]]

   * [[Berezin integral]]
  
   * [[integration over supermanifolds]]
* [[path integral]]
* [[Lie integration]] (the name comes from its relation to the integration of
differential equations and finding integral curves of 
vector fields and flows)

* stratified versions related to Grothendieck rings and valuations:
[[Euler integration]], [[motivic integration]]

## References

(...)

A proof of the [[Riesz representation theorem]] in [[constructive mathematics]] is given in

* [[Thierry Coquand]], [[Bas Spitters]], _Integrals and Valuations_, Logic and Analysis (2009) 1(3) p.1-22, [arXiv:0808.1522](http://arxiv.org/abs/0808.1522), [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.4115/jla.2009.1.3)