

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

An [[associative algebra]] (over a [[field]] $k$) is quasi-free if dually regarded as a [[noncommutative scheme]] it is [[formally smooth]].

## Definition  

Given an [[associative algebra]] $A$ let $\Omega A$ be its [[universal differential envelope]]. 


An associative unital $k$-algebra $A$ is __quasi-free__ (or __formally smooth__) if one of the following equivalent conditions is satisfied

* Given an extension $0\to N\to E\stackrel{q}\to B\to 0$ of algebras where the ideal $N$ is
nilpotent and $a:A\to B$ an algebra map.
Then there exists a homomorphism $a' : A \to E$ such that $q \circ a' = a$.

* $A$ has cohomological dimension $\leq 1$ with respect to [[Hochschild cohomology]];

* $\Omega^1 A$ is a projective $A$-bimodule;

* the universal Hochschild 2-cocycle $c : A\otimes A\to\Omega^2 A$, $c : a\otimes b\mapsto d a d b$ is a coboundary, i.e. $c = b\phi$ for some $\phi:A\to\Omega^2 A$ satisfying the cocycle condition $\phi(a b)=a\phi(b)+\phi(a)b-d a d b$;

* there exists a "right connection" $\nabla:\Omega^1 A\to \Omega^2 A$ i.e. a $k$-linear map satisfying $\nabla(a w)=a\nabla(w)$ and $\nabla (w a) = \nabla(w)a+w d a$ where $w\in\Omega^1 A$ and $a\in A$. 

This is due to ([CuntzQuillen](#CuntzQuillen)).

## Properties

For $A$ an associative algebra, the object $Spec A \in [Alg_k, Set]$ is [[formally smooth]] with respect to the standard infinitesimal cohesive structure over non-commutative algebras (see there for details) precisely if it is quasi-free. 

Notice that the characterization via nilpotent extensions is similar to the definition of commutative [[formally smooth]] algebras as in [[EGAIV]]4 17.1.1. However most commutative formally smooth algebras are _not_ formally smooth in the associative noncommutative sense.


## Examples

[[path algebra|Path algebras]] of [[quivers]] and free algebras are some of the (few classes of) examples. 

## References

* J. Cuntz and [[Daniel Quillen]], _Algebra extensions and nonsingularity_ , J.Amer. Math.
Soc. 8 (1995), 251-289.
 {#CuntzQuillen}

* J. Cuntz and D. Quillen: Cyclic homology and nonsingularity, J. Amer. Math.
Soc. 8 (1995), 373-442.

* [[Maxim Kontsevich]], [[Alexander Rosenberg]], _Noncommutative smooth spaces, ([arXiv:math/9812158](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/9812158))
