
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A symmetric function is roughly a [[polynomial]] that is invariant under permutation of the variables.  However, this is only strictly correct if the number of variables is finite, and symmetric functions depend on a countably infinite number of variables.   The only symmetric *polynomials* in infinitely many variables are the constants.  To fix this, we allow infinitely many terms, as long as the *degree* is finite. 

For example, there is a $1$-dimensional space of homogeneous symmetric functions of degree $1$, with basis

$$ x_1 + x_2 + \cdots = \sum_i x_i .$$

There is a $2$-dimensional space of homogeneous symmetric functions of degree $2$, with basis

$$ x_1^2 + x_2^2 + \cdots = \sum_i x_i^2 $$

and 

$$ \sum_{i \lt j} x_i x_j .$$

(The homogeneous symmetric functions of degree $0$ are just the constants, as usual.)

There is also a noncommutative analogue: [[noncommutative symmetric function]]s.

## Definitions

Let $\Lambda_n$ be the [[ring]] consisting of polynomials in $n$ variables $x_1, \dots, x_n$ that are invariant under all permutations of the variables; these are the **symmetric functions in $n$ variables** or **symmetric polynomials** in $n$ variables.   The rings $\Lambda_n$ are [[graded ring|graded]] by degree in the usual way, and there are homomorphisms of graded rings

$$ \Lambda_{n+1} \hookrightarrow \Lambda_{n} ,$$

given by setting the $(n+1)$st variable equal to zero.  Taking the [[limit]] (in the category-theoretic sense) of these rings $\Lambda_n$ as $n \to \infty$, we get the graded ring $\Lambda_\infty$.   This is usually called $\Lambda$, or the ring of **symmetric functions in countably many variables**, or simply **symmetric functions** (or even **symmetric polynomials**, even though very few of them are really polynomials).

Alternatively, $\Lambda$ can be constructed as a [[colimit]] of rings using the homomorphisms

$$ \Lambda_{n} \hookrightarrow \Lambda_{n+1} ,$$

where we add in new terms with the new variable to make the result symmetric.

The definition depends on the [[ground field|ground]] [[field]] (or [[commutative ring]] or [[rig]]) $k$, so we may write $\Lambda(k)$ to be precise.

+-- {: .query}
[[David Corfield]]: Why does Hazewinkel in his description of the construction of $\Lambda$ on p. 129 of [this](http://arxiv.org/abs/0804.3888) use a graded projective limit construction in terms of projections of polynomial rings?

[[John Baez]]: Hmm, it sounds like you're telling me that there are 'projections' 

$$ \Lambda_{n+1} \to \Lambda_n $$

given by setting the $(n+1)$st variable to zero, and that Hazewinkel defines $\Lambda$ to be the limit (= projective limit) 

$$ \cdots \to \Lambda_2 \to \Lambda_1 \to \Lambda_0 $$

rather than the colimit

$$ \Lambda_0 \to \Lambda_1 \to \Lambda_2 \to \cdots $$

Right now I don't understand the difference between these two constructions well enough to tell which one is 'right'.
Can someone explain the difference?  Presumably there's more stuff in the limit than the colimit.

[[Mike Shulman]]: I think the difference is that the limit contains "polynomials" with infinitely many terms, and the colimit doesn't.  That's often the way of these things.

Actually, on second glance, I don't understand the description of the maps in the colimit system; are you sure they actually exist?  What exactly does it mean to "add in new terms with the new variable to make the result symmetric"?

[[David Corfield]]: The two constructions are explained very well in section 2.1 of the [Wikipedia article](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_of_symmetric_functions).

[[Mike Shulman]]: Thanks!  Here's what I get from the Wikipedia article: the projections are easy to define.  They are surjective and turn out to have sections (as ring homomorphisms).  The ring of symmetric functions can be defined either as the colimit of the sections, or as the the limit of the projections _in the category of graded rings_.  The limit in the category of all rings would contain too much stuff.
=--


## Properties

Symmetric functions play a fundamental role throughout [[representation theory]], [[combinatorics]] and [[algebraic topology]].  The ring of symmetric functions, $\Lambda$, has many interesting properties.   For example, it is the free $\lambda$-[[lambda-ring|ring]] on one generator (a coincidence of notation that has not been ignored).  It is also a [[plethory]].  There are various bases of $\Lambda$ whose elements are in natural one-to-one correspondence with [[Young diagram|Young diagrams]]. 

$\Lambda$ acquires many of these properties from the fact that it is the [[Grothendieck ring]] of the category of $k$-linear [[species]].  This category is defined to be the functor category

$$ [\mathbb{P}, Vect_{k}] $$

where $\mathbb{P}$ is the groupoid of [[finite sets]] and bijections, and $Vect_k$ is the category of vector spaces over a field $k$ of characteristic zero.  The category of $k$-linear species becomes a symmetric monoidal category thanks to [[Day convolution]].   It is also a [[semisimple category|semisimple abelian category]], with a basis of objects given by irreducible [[representation|representations]] of [[symmetric groups]] --- one for each [[Young diagram]].  So, the [[Grothendieck group]] of this category becomes a commutative ring with a basis given by Young diagrams, and this is just $\Lambda$.  

$\Lambda$ is also the Grothendieck ring of a somewhat smaller 
$Schur$, whose objects are [[Schur functors]].    There are various ways to think about these, but they can be identified with $k$-linear species

$$ F: \mathbb{P} \to Vect_{k} $$

with the special property that $F(n)$ is finite-dimensional for all $n$ and $0$ for $n$ sufficiently large.   The category of Schur functors is again a [[semisimple category|semisimple abelian category]] with a basis of objects given by irreducible [[representation|representations]] of [[symmetric groups]], so its Grothendieck ring is again $\Lambda$.   For more on this, see [[Schur functor]].


## References

* Michiel Hazewinkel, _Witt vectors_, Part 1. [arXiv/0804.3888](http://arxiv.org/abs/0804.3888)

The classification described above of irreducible $S_n$-modules over $\mathbb{C}$ also works unchanged for any algebraically closed field $k$ of characteristic zero.  It also works when $k$ has characteristic $p$ and $n$ is not divisible by $p$.   There\'s an exercise at the end of section 6.1 of Serre\'s book (page 64 of the french edition) that says that if $k$ is a field of characteristic $p \gt 0$ then the group algebra of the group $G$ is semisimple iff $p$ doesn\'t divide the order of $G$.

Apart from this, the field matters a lot.  There is a construction that gives all irreducible $k S_n$-modules for any field $k$, field, completely analogous to the Specht module construction over $\mathbb{C}$.  However, it describes each module as a quotient module of a Specht module, and in general not even the dimension of these irreducible modules is known, let alone an explicit basis, or representing matrices.

Possibly the best book on this subject is:

* Gordon D. James, _The representation theory of the symmetric groups_, Lecture Notes in Mathematics **682**, Springer, Berlin, 1978.

James also has a readable survey article that outlines developments in the '80's and '90's: 

* Gordon D. James, Symmetric groups and Schur algebras, in _Algebraic Groups and their Representations_, eds. R. W. Carter and J. Saxl, Kluwer Acad. Publ. Netherlands 1998.

Another approach is described here:

* Alexander Kleshchev, _Linear and Projective Representations of Symmetric Groups_, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2009.

One can study symmetric functions in any characteristic, or over any integral domain.  The power sum symmetric functions do not generate the ring of symmetric functions over $\mathbb{Z}$, and this difference matters. They appear to be of limited usefulness in the description of the modular irreducible representations of $S_n$.



[[!redirects symmetric function]]
[[!redirects symmetric functions]]
[[!redirects symmetric polynomial]]
[[!redirects symmetric polynomials]]
