


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Group Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include group theory - contents]]
=--
#### Categorification
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include categorification - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea 

The term _Grothendieck group_ has a restricted and a more general meaning.

In its restricted sense the _Grothendieck group_ of a [[commutative monoid]] (commutative [[semi-group]]) $A$ is a specific presentation of its [[group completion]], given as a certain [[group]] structure on a [[quotient]] of the [[Cartesian product]] $A \times A$. This is such that applied to the additive monoid of [[natural numbers]] $\mathbb{N}$ it produces the additive group of [[integers]] $\mathbb{Z}$ represented by pairs of natural numbers $(n_+, n_-)$ subject to an [[equivalence relation]] which identifies them with their [[difference]] $n_+ - n_-$.

The same kind of procedure applied to [[decategorification|isomorphism classes]] of certain [[Quillen exact category|Quillen exact categories]] happens to compute a group that is called the [[algebraic K-theory]] of these categories. There is a very simple very general nonsense behind this, that is described at [[K-theory]].

Notably the Grothendieck group completion of the [[decategorification]] of the category of [[topological vector bundles]] on some ([[compact Hausdorff space|compact Hausdorff]]) [[topological space]] $X$ produces the group known as the [[topological K-theory]] of $X$.

Given this one speaks more generally of the ([[algebraic K-theory|algebraic]]) [[K-theory]] group of a suitable category (one presenting a [[stable (∞,1)-category]] in some way) as its _Grothendieck group_ .

In that sense, the Grothendieck group of a ($\infty$-)category $C$ with a notion of [[fibration sequence|cofibration sequence]]s is the [[decategorification]] set $K(C)$ equipped with a notion of addition that is encoded in these homotopy exact sequences.


We now first state the definition of "Grothendieck group completion" -- which is really just the _free group completion of an abelian [[monoid]]_ --  and then the definition of Grothendieck group in the sense of [[algebraic K-theory]]. Notice that a priori both concepts are entirely independent constructions on different entities. But in various special case both can be applied to specific objects so as to produce the same result.


## For commutative monoids

Every [[abelian  group]] is in particular a [[commutative monoid]]. The [[forgetful functor]] $U \colon Ab \to CMon$ from the [[category]] [[Ab]] ot the category [[CMon]] has a [[left adjoint]] $F$ (the correspnding [[free functor]]), the _[[group completion]]_ functor

$$
  Ab
    \underoverset
      {\underset{U}{\longrightarrow}}
      {\overset{F}{\longleftarrow}}
      {\bot}
  CMon
$$

The _Grothendieck group construction on commutative monoids_ (def. \ref{GrothendieckGroupViaQuotientOfCartesianProduct} below) is an explict presentation of this [[group completion]] functor.

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The idea of the free group on an abelian monoid is a very simple algebraic idea that, at least for a [[cancellative monoid]] (so that the unit is monic and one can reasonably use the term ‘completion’) certainly predates [[Grothendieck]]. That the [[integers]] $\mathbb{Z}$ is the group completion of the [[natural numbers]] $\mathbb{N}$ goes back at least to [[Kronecker]].

=--

### Definition

+-- {: .num_defn #GrothendieckGroupViaQuotientOfCartesianProduct}
###### Definition

Let $(A,+)$ be a [[commutative monoid]] (i.e. a commutative [[semi-group]]).

On the [[Cartesian product]] of underlying sets $A \times A$ (the set of ordered [[pairs]] of elements in $A$), consider the [[equivalence relation]]

$$
  \big(
    (a_+, a_-) \sim_1 (b_+, b_-)
  \big) 
    \;\Leftrightarrow\; 
  \left(
    \underset{k \in A}{\exists}
    \left( 
      a_+ + b_- + k = b_+ + a_- + k
    \right)
  \right)
$$

or equivalently the equivalence relation

$$
  \big(
    (a_+, a_-) \sim_2 (b_+, b_-)
  \big) 
    \;\Leftrightarrow\; 
  \left(
    \underset{k_1, k_2 \in A}{\exists}
    \left(
      (a_+ + k_1, a_- + k_1)
      =
      (b_+ + k_2, b_- + k_2)
    \right)
  \right)
  \,.
$$

Write

$$
  G(A) \coloneqq (A \times A)/\sim
$$

for the set of [[equivalence classes]] under this equivalence relation. This inherits a binary operation

$$
  + \;\colon\; G(A) \times G(A) \longrightarrow G(A)
$$

by applying the addition in $A$ on representatives:


$$
  [a_+,a_-] + [b_+,b_-] \coloneqq [ a_+ + b_+ , a_- + b_- ]
  \,.
$$

This defines the structure of an [[abelian group]]

$$
  (G(A),+)
$$

and this is the _Grothendieck group_ of $A$. 

This comes with a canonical [[homomorphism]] of [[semigroups]]

$$
  \array{
    A &\overset{\phantom{A} \eta_A \phantom{A} }{\longrightarrow}& G(A)
    \\
    a &\overset{\phantom{AAA}}{\mapsto}& [a,0]
  }
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The Grothendieck group in def. \ref{GrothendieckGroupViaQuotientOfCartesianProduct} is well defined, and the homomorphism $A \to G(A)$ satisfies the [[universal property]] of the [[group completion]] of $A$: 


Given an [[abelian group]] $B$ and a [[homomorphism]] of commutative [[semi-groups]] ([[commutative monoids]]) $f \colon A \longrightarrow B$ then there is a unique homomorphism of [[abelian groups]] $\tilde A \;\colon\; G(A) \longrightarrow B$ such that $f = \tilde f\circ \eta_A$:

$$
  \array{
    A
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{\eta_A}}\downarrow & \searrow^{\mathrlap{f}}
    \\
    G(A) &\overset{\exists ! \tilde f}{\longrightarrow}& B    
  }
$$


=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

First to see that the two equivalence relations in def. \ref{GrothendieckGroupViaQuotientOfCartesianProduct} are indeed the same:

If $a_+ + b_- + k = b_+ + a_- + k$ then take $k_1 \coloneqq b_- + k$ and $k_2 \coloneqq a_- + k$ to find that

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    (a_+ + k_1 , a_- + k_1)
    & = 
    ( a_+ + b_- + k, a_- + b_- + k)
    \\
    & =
    (b_+ + a_- + k, a_- + b_- + k)
    \\
    & =
    (b_+ + k_2, b_- + k_2)
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$ 

Conversely, if $(a_+ + k_1 , a_- + k_1) = (b_+ + k_2, b_- + k_2)$ then take $k \coloneqq k_1 + k_2$ to find that

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    a_+ + b_- + k 
      & = 
    a_+ + k_1 + b_- + k_2
    \\
      & =
    b_+ + k_2 + a_- + k_1
    \\
      & = 
    b_+ + a_- + k
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$

Now to see that $(G(A),+)$ is indeed an abelian group: 

1. the second equivalence relation also makes it immediate that the [[neutral element]] is the class 

   $$
     [0,0] =  [a,a]
   $$
   
   for all $a \in A$.

1. with this the second equivalence relation makes it immediate that the [[inverse element]] to any $[a_+, a_-]$ is 

   $$
     -[a_+, a_-] = [a_-, a_+]
     \,, 
   $$


That this group is abelian is immediate from the fact that $A$ is assumed to be abelian.

Regarding the universal property: let $B$ be any abelian group and let

$$
  \tilde f \colon G(A) \longrightarrow B
$$

be a homomorphism of abelian groups. Observe from the above that then

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \tilde f([a_+,a_-])
    & = 
    \tilde f( [a_+,0]  - [a_-, 0] )
    \\
    & = 
    \tilde f([a_+,0]) - \tilde f([a_-,0])
    \\
    & = 
    \tilde f(\eta_A(a_+)) - \tilde f(\eta_A(a_-))
    \\
    & = 
    f(a_+) - f(a_-)
  \end{aligned}
$$

by the linearity of $f$ and the definition of $\eta_A \colon A \to G(A)$. 

Conversely, given $f \colon A \to B$ then this equation uniquely defines $\tilde f$ with $f = \tilde f \circ \eta_A$.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark #GrothendieckGroupForCancellativeMonoids}
###### Remark
**(Grothendieck group for cancellative monoids)**

If $(A,+)$ is a [[cancellative monoid]], in that 

$$
  \underset{a,b,z \in A}{\forall}
  \left(
    \left(
      a \cdot z = b \cdot z
   \right)
     \Rightarrow
   \left(
     a = b
   \right)
  \right)
$$  

then, as is immediate from the first of the two equivalence relations in def. \ref{GrothendieckGroupViaQuotientOfCartesianProduct}, the definition of the Grothendieck group $G(A)$ simplies to 

$$
  G(A) = (A \times A)/ \sim
$$

with

$$
  \big(
    (a_+,a_-)
      \sim
    (b_+,b_-)
  \big)
     \;\Leftrightarrow\;
  \big(
    a__+ + b_- = b_+ + a_-
  \big)
  \,.
$$


=--



### Examples

+-- {: .num_example }
###### Example
**(Grothendieck group of the [[natural numbers]] is the [[integers]])

Let $(\mathbb{N}, +)$ be the [[commutative monoid]] of [[natural numbers]] under [[addition]]. By def. \ref{GrothendieckGroupViaQuotientOfCartesianProduct} its Grothendieck group consists of pairs $(n_+, n_-) \in \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N}$ subject to some equivalence relation, and since $(\mathbb{N}, +)$ is [[cancellative monoid|cancellative]], remark  \ref{GrothendieckGroupForCancellativeMonoids} says that this equivalence relation is simply

$$
  \big(
    (a_+,a_-)
      \sim
    (b_+,b_-)
  \big)
     \;\Leftrightarrow\;
  \big(
    a__+ + b_- = b_+ + a_-
  \big)
  \,.
$$

Let

$$
  \array{
    (G(\mathbb{N}),+) &\longrightarrow& (\mathbb{Z},+)
    \\
    (n_+, n_-) &\mapsto&  n_+ - n_-
  }
$$

be the evident [[homomorphism]] of abelian groups to the additive group of [[integers]].

This is manifestly [[surjective function|surjective]]. For it to be injective we need that 

$$
  (a_+, a_-) \sim (b_+,b_-)
$$

precisely if 

$$
  a_+ - a_- = b_+ - b_- \;\; \in \mathbb{Z}
  \,.
$$

The last condition holds precisely if

$$
  a_+ + b_- = b_+ + a_- \;\; \in \mathbb{Z}
$$

which is precisely the above equivalence relation. Therefore the above homomorphism is a [[bijection]] and hence the Grothendieck group of the natural numbers is the [[integers]]:

$$
  (G(\mathbb{N}, +) \simeq \mathbb{N}
  \,.
$$

=--

+-- {: .num_example }
###### Example

Consider the commutative monoid $(\mathbb{Z}^\times, \cdot)$ of non-zero [[integers]] under [[multiplication]]. 

Consider the homomorphism

$$
  \array{
     (G(\mathbb{Z}), \cdots)
       &\longrightarrow&
     (\mathbb{Q}^\times, \cdot)
     \\
     ( n_+ ,n_- )
        &\mapsto&
     n_+/n_-
  }
  \,.
$$

It is immediate that this is surjective. For it to be injective we need that 

$$
  (a_+, a_-)
    \sim
  (b_+, b_-)
$$

precisely if 

$$
  a_+/ a_- = b_+ / b_- \;\; \in \mathbb{Q}
$$

which is the case precisely if

$$
  a_+ \cdot b_- = b_+ \cdot a_-
  \,.
$$

Since $(\mathbb{Z}^\times, \cdot)$ is a [[cancellative monoid]], this is indeed the equivalence relation on $G(\mathbb{Z}^\times)$, according to remark \ref{GrothendieckGroupForCancellativeMonoids}.



=--


+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example
+*([[topological K-theory]])**

Let $X$ be a [[topological space]] and let $(Vect(X)_{/\sim}, \oplus)$ be the monoid of [[isomorphism classes]] of [[topological vector bundles]] on $X$ with addition induced from the [[direct sum of vector bundles]]. Then the Grothendieck group

$$
  K(X) \coloneqq (G(Vect(X)_{/\sim}), +)
$$

is called the _[[topological K-theory]]_ group of $X$.

=--


## For a category

Fundamentally a Grothendieck group is something assigned to a [[stable (∞,1)-category]]. It is the group structure 
$+ : K(C)\times K(C) \to K(C)$ on the [[decategorification]] $K(C)$ of $C$ defined by the rule that for every [[fibration sequence]] 

$$
  A \to X \to B
$$ 

in $C$ the equivalence classes $[A]$, $[B]$ and $[X]$ satisfy

$$
  [X] = [A] + [B]
  \,.
$$

In particular the inverse $-[A]$ of an element $[A]$ is the class of its [[loop space object]] $\Omega A$ or equivalently of its [[delooping]] $\mathbf{B} A$ called the _suspension_ $\Sigma A$, since by definition the sequences

$$
  \Omega A \to 0 \to A
$$

and

$$
  A \to 0 \to \Sigma A
$$

are [[fibration sequence]], so that

$$
  [A] + [\Omega A] = 0
$$

and

$$
 [A] + [\Sigma A] = 0
 \,.
$$

But there are many ways to _model_ a [[stable (∞,1)-category]] by an ordinary category. Essentially for each of these ways there is a seperate prescription for how to model the above general construction in terms of concrete 1-categorical constructions.

In particular from an

* [[abelian category]]

and a

* [[Quillen exact category]]

one obtains the corresponding [[category of chain complexes|categories of chain complexes]]. These are [[stable (infinity,1)-category|stable (∞,1)-categories]]. Below we list presciptions for how to compute the Grothendieck/K-theory groups of these in terms of the underlying 1-categories.

Apart from the case of abelian categories, this requires some handle on the fibration sequences. A tool developed to handle exactly this for the purpose of computing Grothendieck/K-theory groups is the notion of a [[Waldhausen category]]. That provides the sufficient extra information to get a hand on the homotopy exact sequences.


### of an abelian category ### 

Let $C$ be an [[abelian category]].  The **Grothendieck group** or [[algebraic K-theory]] group of $C$, denoted $K(C)$, is the [[abelian group]] generated by [[decategorification|isomorphism class]]es of objects of $C$, with relations of the form 

$$[X] = [A] + [B] $$

whenever there is a [[short exact sequence]] 

$$ 0 \to A \to X \to C \to 0 $$


### of a Quillen exact category ###

An exact category $C$ in the present sense is a full [[subcategory]]
of an [[abelian category]] $\hat C$ such that the collection
of all sequences $0 \to A \to X \to B \to 0$
in $C$ that are [[exact sequence]]s in $\hat C$ has the property that for every [[exact sequence]] $A \to X \to B$ in $\hat C$ with $A$ and $B \in C$ also their "sum" $X$ is in $C$.

Given an exact category $C$ with the inherited notion of exact sequences this way, the definition of its Grothendieck group is as above.


### of a Waldhausen category ###


A [[Waldhausen category]] is a [[category with weak equivalences]] with an [[initial object]] -- called $0$ -- and equipped with the notion of auxiliary morphism called _cofibrations_. These satisfy some axioms which are such that the ordinary 1-categorical [[cokernel]] of a cofibration $A \hookrightarrow X $, i.e. the ordinary [[pushout]]

$$
  \array{
    A &\hookrightarrow& X
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    0 &\to &  B 
  }
$$

computes the desired [[homotopy colimit|homotopy]] [[pushout]]. (This is exactly dual to the reasoning by which one computes [[homotopy pullback]]s in a [[category of fibrant objects]]. See there for details.)

Therefore in a Waldhausen category a [[fibration sequence|cofibration sequence]] is a [[pushout]] sequence

$$
 A \hookrightarrow X \to B
$$

where the first morphism is a cofibration.

The Grothendieck/[[K-theory]]-group of the [[Waldhausen category]] $C$ is then, as before, on the [[decategorification]] $K(C)$ the abelian group structure given by

$$
  [X] = [A] + [B]
$$

for all cofibration sequences as above.




### Examples 



* The Grothendieck group of the [[Quillen exact category]] of [[vector bundle]]s on a space $X$ is called the [[topological K-theory]] of $X$.

  Notice that vector bundles do not form an [[abelian category]].


* The Grothendieck group of the category of finite-dimensional complex-linear [[representations]] of a [[group]] is called its [[representation ring]].

These two examples illustrate a general fact: the Grothendieck group of a [[monoidal category|monoidal]] [[abelian category]] inherits a ring structure from the tensor product in this category, and thus becomes a ring, called the [[Grothendieck ring]]. See also the general discussion at [[decategorification]].

* Every [[Quillen exact category]] $C$ is canonically equipped with the structure of a [[Waldhausen category]]. The two different prescriptions for forming the Grothendieck group $K(C)$ of $C$ do coincide.


+-- {: .query}

[[Urs Schreiber]]: the category of vector bundles is not abelian, but just Quillen exact. I added a clause to that effect above. 

Generally, my feeling is that "Grothendieck group" refers to "Grothendieck group completion of a monoid". The first definition at the Wikipedia entry on Gorthendieck group. 

What is described here -- the group defined by sequences -- is the definition of the K-theory group in algebraic K-theory. This is described at the beginning of [[K-theory]]. 

I'd think that the logic is rather that in some cases both concepts happen to coincide: the algebraic K-theory of the category of bounded complexes of vector bundles on a space happens to coincide with the Grothendieck group completion of the monoid of isomorphism classes of vector bundles.

My feeling is that the Wikipedia entry is a bit suboptimal in its second part, where it effectively calls algebraic K-theory the "Grothendieck group completion". I'd think one shouldn't do that in this generality.

Another thing in this context is the statement about the exact sequences. It is really the _homotopy_ exact sequences namely the [[fibration sequence]]s that count. Of course some of them can be computed by ordinary exact sequences if these are sufficiently cofibrant. That's what the structure provided by a [[Waldhausen category]] structure provides: a realization of the homotopy exact sequences as pushouts of cofibration morphisms. 

So in summary my feeling is: the entry in its current form actually tries to define algebraic K-theory and not the Grothendieck group concept, and that description with a few subtleties taken care of is currently at [[K-theory]] and should eventually be copied/moved to [[algebraic K-theory]]. The entry titled "Grothendieck group" should discuss the concept where from a monoid $A$ a group structure on $A \times A$ is defined by dividing out the equivalence relation $(a_1,b_1) \sim (a_2,b_2) \Leftrightarrow \exists k : a_1 + b_2 + k = a_2 + b_1 + k$.

But maybe I am mixed up. Let me know what you think.

_Toby_:  Well, I\'ll say this: I always understood 'Grothendieck group' in the article text above, and I never understood 'K-theory'.  That may have been my fault, of course, and it may be telling that I was John\'s student.

[[Urs Schreiber]]: so Weibel in his book referenced below indeed says "Grothendieck group" synonomously for "algebraic K-theory group" and says just "group completion" (chapter to section 1) for what I suggested should properly be called "Grothendieck group completion". 

I added corresponding remarks to the beginning of the entry. And I created two subsections under "Definintion". One for plain group completion. The other for algebraic K-theory groups.

_Toby_:  The idea of the free group on an abelian monoid is a very simple algebraic idea that, at least for a cancellative monoid (so that the unit is monic and one can reasonably use the term ‘completion’) certainly predates Grothendieck. That $\mathbb{Z}$ is the group completion of $\mathbb{N}$ goes back at least to Kronecker.

[[Urs Schreiber]]: I copied that last paragraph of yours into the section above. I still think that many people will say "Grothendieck group" for this group completion. But maybe I am wrong and we should branch off another page on "free group completion".

Colin Tan: I suggest branching off another page on "free group completion" and including the noncommutative case in there.

=--

## Related concepts

* [[group completion]]

## References 

In 

* [[Charles Weibel]], _The K-book: An introduction to algebraic K-theory_ ([web](http://www.math.rutgers.edu/~weibel/Kbook.html))

see

* section 2: _The Grothendieck group $K_0$_ ([pdf](http://www.math.rutgers.edu/~weibel/Kbook/Kbook.II.pdf))

See also

* [The Grothendieck Construction](http://online.itp.ucsb.edu/online/ktheory/wu/) (UCSB ITP Seminar)

[[!redirects Grothendieck groups]]