
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The notion of _representation_ is closely related to, or even identical, to that of [[action]]: some object $C$ that has a notion of [[composition]] is _represented_ on some object $D$ that has a notion of composition. In this generality _representation_ is just another word for [[functor]] (or potentially $\infty$-[[infinity-functor|functor]]). But in practice the term _representation_ is typically used in the context of [[representation theory]], where attempt to study $C$ in terms of its representations in $D$, where $D$ is typically rather more familiar.

Most specifically, one studies representations of a [[group]] by linear endomorphisms of a [[vector space]]; that is, $C$ is (the [[delooping]] of) a group and $D$ is [[Vect]].  However, the typical tools in representation theory these days involve vast generalizations of the notion of a linear representation of a group; for instance, one studies [[D-module]]s on [[action groupoid]]s $G //_{Ad}G$ and things like that. This may be thought of as studying representations with values in [[schreiber:∞-vector bundle|∞-vector space]]s.


##Historical Idea (with pedagogic overtones)

###Representing Groups

The notion of a [[group]] of 'operators' was already being used in about 1832 in work by Galois, and others, but there was not a definition of an abstract group until 40 years later when Cayley wrote:

> _A group is defined by the law of composition of its members._ 

(see the article on [The abstract group concept](http://www-history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/HistTopics/Abstract_groups.html) in the St Andrews History of Mathematics archive.) Groups as well behaved sets of functions were beginning to be well understood and used, for instance in Klein's work on geometry. Cayley proved that every finite group could be realised as a group of permutations. The theory of representations grew from that.

An abstract group could be studied by mapping it into a group of permutations or of invertible matrices, as then you could bring techniques form one area of mathematics (linear algebra) to the assistance of another, the Theory of Abstract Groups. This was exploited fully by Frobenius, Burnside, Schur and later Bauer.

That is one theme: you take an abstract algebraic thing and study it by mapping it into a similar structure which you think you know more about!

This also uses another basic idea from the start of group theory.  The earlier pioneers thought of groups as groups of 'operators', but that means they have to operate on something. To make things more explicit, let $G$ be a finite group then we know there are homomorphisms from $G$ into $S_n$. (We could take $n$ to be the order of the group and use Cayley's theorem but we do not assume that is the case.) If we look at such a homomorphism we get an [[action]] of $G$ on an $n$-element set.

Similarly if we take a homomorphism from $G$ into a group of invertible matrices $Gl_n(K)$, for $K$ a field, say, then we get a linear action of $G$ on the vector space, $K^n$.

As you would expect, we can generalise and categorify this basic idea in several useful ways.

We can think of $G$ as a groupoid, $\mathbf{B}G$, (the [[delooping]] of $G$), and then a linear representation / action will be a functor from $\mathbf{B}G$ to $Vect$, the category of vector spaces over $K$.  We could replace $G$ by a general groupoid, or a general category, but then a representation of that is the same as a diagram of that 'shape' in $Vect$. We could replace $Vect$ by another more general category, or higher category, but if we are thinking of diagrams as representations, perhaps we should not totally forget that the term 'representation' did mean a process whereby the perhaps abstract 'syntactical' objects of the category gain a 'semantic' meaning, as 'operations' of some type, and which in turn, can be usefully used to gain information on the inherent structure. 


## General definition

In a rather general form, we therefore have a __representation__ of a category $C$ in a category $D$ is simply a [[functor]] $F\colon C \to D$.  Similarly, an [[homomorphism]] between representations ("[[intertwiner]]") is simply a [[natural transformation]] between functors when they are being thought of as representations.

The term 'representation' is most often used when one or more of the following conditions apply:
*  $D$ is the category $k$-[[Vect]] of vector spaces over some [[field]] $k$; one then has a __$k$-linear representation__.
*  $C$ is the [[delooping]] of a [[group]]; one then has a __group representation__ in $D$.  Such a representation gives us a specific object $V$ of $D$; we say that we have a representation of $G$ on $V$.
*  $C$ is the [[free category]] on a [[quiver]]; one then has a __quiver representation__.

The classical [[representation theory]] of groups is about representations of (finite, topological, smooth etc.) groups on (topological) vector spaces, that is when the first two conditions apply. 

+-- {: .query}
I don\'t agree with this $D \coloneqq Aut(V)$ business.  A $k$-linear representation of a group $G$ is a functor from $\mathbf{B}G$ to $k Vect$, period.  Because $\mathbf{B}G$ has one object (or is pointed), we can pick out an object $V$ of $k Vect$, and it was remiss of me not to mention this (and the language ‘*on* $V$’ vs ‘*in* $D$’.  But we usually don\'t want $D$ to actually *be* $Aut(V)$ instead of $k Vect$; when doing representation theory, we fix $G$ and fix $k$ (or fix $D$ in some other way), but we don\'t fix $V$.  ---Toby

If you look at the textbooks of representation of groups, then they start with representation of groups as homomorphisms of groups, that is just functors. Then they say, that usually the target groups are groups of automorphisms of some other objects. And at the end they say that one usually restricts just to linear automorphisms of linear objects when linearizing the general problematics to the linear one. Now the fact that in some special case there is a category which expresses the same fact does not extend to other symmetry objects, like for representations of vertex operator algebras, pseudotensor categories etc. I mean End(something) or Aut(something) is just inner end in some setup like in closed monoidal category, but there are symmetries in mathematics which have a notion of End of Aut for a single object but do not have good notion of category one level up which has inner homs leading to the same End or Aut. Conceptually actions are about endosymmetries or symmetries (automorphisms) being reducable to categorical ones but not necessarily, I think. In a way you say that you are sure that any symmetry of another object can be expressed internally in some sort of a higher category of such objects, what is to large extent true, but I am sure not for absolutely all examples.  

*  I can't recall ever seeing group homomorphisms $\rho\colon G \to H$ described *in general* as 'representations', but I have limited experience; I should look at some more textbooks.  The one that I learnt the subject from, Serre\'s _Linear Representations of Finite Groups_, looked only at representations on vector spaces from the beginning, but its title suggests a bias that might explain that. (^_^)

(for "on" terminology:) Ross Street uses monads in a 2-category and monads on a 1-category and I know of no objects in category theory. 

*  Yes, this is analogous to representation *in* a category vs *on* an object in such a category.  (But what do you mean by 'I know of no objects in category theory'?)

Another important thing is that the endomorphisms are by definitions often equipped with some additional (e.g. topological) structure which is not necessarily coming from some enrichement of the category of objects. --Zoran

*  Good point.

(Zoran on word "classical representation" being just for groups: so the representations of associative algebras, Lie algebras, Leibniz algebras, topological groups, quivers, are not classical ??).

*  I thought that they came later, but maybe not.  I added 'of groups' to fix/clarify.  ---Toby
=--

There are also enriched, $k$-linear and other versions, hence one can talk about representations of [[Lie algebras]], [[vertex operator algebras]], etc. See also [[representation theory]]. 

## Related concepts

* **representation**

* [[2-representation]]

* [[infinity-representation]]

[[!redirects representation]]
[[!redirects representations]]

[[!redirects linear representation]]
[[!redirects linear representations]]

[[!redirects group representation]]
[[!redirects group representations]]
[[!redirects representation of a group]]
[[!redirects representations of a group]]
[[!redirects representations of groups]]

[[!redirects quiver representation]]
[[!redirects quiver representations]]
[[!redirects representation of a quiver]]
[[!redirects representations of a quiver]]
[[!redirects representations of quivers]]
