[[!include all changes]]


All non-trivial additions or changes to the $n$Lab should briefly be indicated here. This way [[Contributors|the rest of us]] can spot them, so we can learn what you know --- and maybe make further improvements!

+-- {: .standout}

Please log all your non-trivial changes to the $n$Lab here!

=--

Here "non-trivial" means: anything that any other contributor might be interested in taking notice of. If you fix a trivial typo in the text somewhere, that is highly appreciated but unlikely to be controversial and hence need not be logged here. But already if you fix a typo in some _formula_, it may be of interest. Generally: the more you log your activity here, the better. Even when in doubt whether anyone else might be interested in changes you made, drop a note here on what you did.

These comments should go in _reverse_ chronological order, so that the latest are on top of the list. To keep the list international, use the date in UTC (the date given by the server for your edits).  However, regardless of that, be sure to **add new comments to the top** of the list.

***


## 2009-08-25

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  More at [[affine space]].
   *  You\'re welcome, Zoran; but to be honest, I\'m the one who invoked the problem.  (I won\'t say that I *caused* the problem, since the server did make a mistake, probably timing out.  But if I had been more careful, then I wouldn\'t have mindlessly hit reload and saved my edit again.)

* [[Mike Shulman]]: 

  * Did some editing of [[heap]], including adding two alternate definitions of the automorphism group, considering its functoriality, and incorporating the discussion into the main text.

  * Claimed that Toby's fix of [[affine space]] contains superfluous data.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: added links to [[heap]] and [[zoranskoda:affine space]] at [[affine space]]; and the original (B and PS) references to [[BPS-state]].
   * created [[cluster algebra]] with overview but without strict definition yet. 
   * Thank you, Toby, for masterly fixing the connection inconsistency in [[dilogarithm]]. 

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  A dropped connection caused some trouble at [[dilogarithm]], but I think that I fixed it.
   *  Fixed [[affine space]].
   *  Sorry about [[fine sheaf]]; I was going to rephrase things, decided not to, and didn\'t change that back.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[dilogarithm]]. 

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: in case anyone is waiting for reactions from me: I am currently on a small vacation with little internet access. Will be back at full speed next Sunday or else next Monday

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: added synonym flasque to [[flabby sheaf]]; query at [[history of cohomology with local coefficients]]. Created [[quantum dilogarithm]], but for now it consists only of references and links.

* [[Mike Shulman]]:

  * Question/correction at [[affine space]].

  * Comment at [[symmetric function]].

  * Discovered, and restarted, the terminological discussion at [[lax natural transformation]] from back in June.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: $A$ and $B$ in [[fine sheaf]] are already closed, so I removed Toby's correction taking closure. 

* [[David Roberts]]: some dates at [[twisted cohomology]] on the earliest references, and added title, date and small clarification on Reidemeister's 1938 article at [[history of cohomology with local coefficients]].

## 2009-08-24

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Started [[Euclidean space]], [[Cartesian space]], [[inner product space]], [[affine space]], [[constant function]].
   *  Started [[ground ring]] (with redirects [[base field]] and interpolations, also terms with [[scalar]]).  I see this as a place to talk about the issues related to this choice, although mostly it\'s a list of other articles now.
   *  Formatting edits at each of Zoran\'s new pages listed below.
   *  Discussion at [[database of categories]].
   *  Added a link to Andrew\'s request for comments below.

* [[Zoran Škoda]] created [[soft sheaf]], [[fine sheaf]], [[family of supports]], [[analytic geometry]].

* [[David Corfield]]: Mike's right at [[symmetric function]] isn't he? So the definition needs redoing. Would do it myself, but how does one put the bit about grading properly?

* [[Andrew Stacey]] pondered the format of [[database of categories]].

   By the way, it would still be really useful if people could take a look at the migrated n-lab.  The __main__ question I want to know is whether the pages look right.  The migration involved a step or two that were pretty much guesswork and I want to know whether I guessed right or not.  If a page looks horribly wrong, or something doesn't work how it ought, please let me know.  The best ways to let me know are either by email or by [commenting over at the forum](http://www.math.ntnu.no/~stacey/Vanilla/nForum/comments.php?DiscussionID=52).

* [[David Roberts]]: trivial comment at [[synthetic differential geometry]] in response to Mike.


## 2009-08-23

*  [[Gonçalo Marques]] has a report at [[symmetric function]].

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Tried to clean up the formatting at [[Jim Stasheff]]\'s new [[history of cohomology with local coefficients]].  In particular, this involved removing some stuff that seemed to refer to a bibliography that wasn\'t there, so please complain (or just put it back) if that was wrong.

* [[Mike Shulman]]:

  * Wrote a bit about structured spaces at [[space]].
  * Comments about terminology at [[compactly generated space]].
  * Added $Mod_R$ to [[database of categories]].
  * Continued discussions at [[symmetric function]] and [[synthetic differential geometry]].


## 2009-08-22:

*  [[John Baez]]: 

   *  added material to [[database of categories]] --- more on Rel and SimpSet --- and replied to Toby's and Rafael's comments there.  What we want --- I think --- is not a massive list of all the categories we know (I could make up 5 a minute for the rest of my life), but a list of categories _including their basic categorical properties_.  I don't want to worry too much about the format of this list until it's gotten a lot longer.  

   * tried to get Rafael to visit this 'latest changes' page (and the corresponding pages for many previous months), log his changes here, and interact with us a bit more here.

   * replied to David's and Toby's comments on [[symmetric function]].
   
   * wondered why each of these sub-entries is starting with an asterisk intead of a little circle, and tried in vain to correct it.  Help!

     *  _Toby_:  You need the spacing to match.  In your line `*__[[John_Baez]]:` (spaces added), see how the `*__` takes up $3$ characters?  Then every line that comes under it should begin with $3$ spaces.  (Sometimes you can get away with fewer.)

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Slight edits to [[space]].

*  [[Rafael Borowiecki]] has a question at [[Bousfield localization]].

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: 

  * expanded [[simplicial object]] a little, added Idea, Examples and mentioned cosimplicial objects 

    corrected at [[singular cohomology]] the alleged simplicial ring of functions to a cosimplicial ring

  * replied to [[Ronnie Brown]] at [[singular cohomology]]

  * thanks to [[Toby Bartels|Toby]] for [[space]] -- I have just one request for a change of wording there

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Thanks to [[Rafael Borowiecki]], I added a link at [[Higher Topos Theory]] to the published version on Lurie\'s MIT website.


## 2009-08-21:

* [[Vaughan Pratt]]: changed "category: categories" to "category: category" for Chu construction.  (Rationale: The plural form was just my misremembering the name of that category, I didn't mean to start a new category.  Chu(V,k) is a category and therefore should be findable as such, but it would take a while to write a separate page for every pair (V,k).)  (I also edited "Editing latest changes" but presumably that goes without saying. :)  -vp)

  *  _Toby_:  That still doesn\'t fit in with the other pages in that category; it would be different if we had a page [[Chu]] with links like '[[Chu]]$(V,k)$' in other pages.  *However*, I think that the fault is more in the peculiarity of the previous system (if I explained exactly why I created `category: category`, then you\'d see how silly it is), so I do *not* think that you should actually change anything (other than plural to singular, which you did).

*  [[Vaughan Pratt]] has started [category: categories](/nlab/list/categories) and put [[Chu construction]] in it.  [[Toby Bartels|I]]\'m not sure what this category is supposed to be for; the entry wouldn\'t fit into [category: category](/nlab/list/category) either, since it\'s not a specific category (although maybe that is not the best criterion).

* [[Ronnie Brown]]: Query (badly formatted) added to [[singular cohomology]]. 

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Wrote [[space]], with the idea that this should be very general and mostly point people to other, more specific, pages.
   *  Messed with [[Schur's lemma]] a bit.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: further polished and edited [[∞-quantity]], gave more details on how the characterization of the deRham complex as the normalized Moore complex of functions on simplices follows from Anders Kock's results and provided a reference that provides the statements about the relation between functions on $\mathbf{B}G$ and the Chevalley-Eilenberg algebra in the algebraic context.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[Schur's lemma]].

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Some breaking up into paragraphs and things at [[hyperplane line bundle]], [[symplectic manifold]], and [[Kähler manifold]].

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[Killing form]] with some words on Casimir operators. Eventually Casimir operators should be treated separately, but it is beneficial to develop the unique entry first to accumulate common facts, conventions and notation, because the two are closely related. 

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: 

  * I am preparing some ground for a comprehensive discussion of the theorem -- which I think we have now, using the latest addition at [[monoidal Dold-Kan correspondence]] -- that Anders Kock's chacraterization of the deRahm DGCA is precisely nothing but the characterization of the image of the cosimplicial algebra of functionas on infinitesimal simplicies under the normalized Moore cochain complex.
  
    I wanted to do that at the entry on $(\infty,1)$-quantity. It could also go at [[differential forms in synthetic differential geometry]], but as the $(\infty,1)$-quantity pages is globally marked as "research material" I thought it might be good to put it there and then just point to it from elsewhere.

    But in the course of this I noticed first of all that my use "$(\infty,1)$-quantity" was a misnomer. It should be "$\infty$-quantity". To explain (to myself) why, I created the dual entry [[∞-space]]. Then I moved the material from the former [[(infinity,1)-quantity]] to the new [[∞-quantity]] and started editing a bit and put redirects.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[symplectic vector space]], [[symplectic manifold]], [[Kähler manifold]], [[hyperplane line bundle]] having not only $\mathcal{O}(1)$ but also the basics for $\mathcal{O}(-1)$, $\mathcal{O}(n)$.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: 

  * moved the new discussion of references by [[David Roberts]] at [[topological T-duality]] to the References section, edited slightly and inserted some links

  * expanded [[symmetric monoidal category]] which was very stubby (and still is): added an "Idea" section with pointers to the general context -- and started adding a list of examples

* [[David Corfield]]: asked a question at [[symmetric function]].

* [[David Roberts]]: links at [[topological T-duality]] and mention of early work on the topic.

* [[Omar Antolín-Camarena]]: added a definition to [[accessible category]], could use checking by someone who knows.

* [[Omar Antolín-Camarena]]: created [[small object]], whose definition was missing from [[locally presentable category]].

* [[John Baez]]: started a [[database of categories]].  This is very preliminary, but it could be very useful if we keep working on it.  The idea is to list lots of categories and their categorical properties.  If this list becomes long we can try to organize it somehow.

   * Zoran: I was thinking of this idea long time ago and told many people including some of the nlab members. I am happy that somebody else also came up with this. 

* [[David Roberts]]: question at [[topological T-duality]]. No mention has been made of the Adelaide school's treatement there!
  
  * [[John Baez]]: so, please tell us what that school has done, or at least add some links to papers on the arXiv.

  * [[David Roberts]]: I did provide a couple of references in my comment. But to quote Galois, \'I have not time!\' (but I'm not about to duel anyone). I'll do a little bit now.

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Started [[singular cohomology]] by copying the definition from [[cup product]].
   *  An important reference at [[database of categories]].  We\'re already using Instiki\'s category system here!
   *  Moved some stuff about the structure from [[topology]] to [[topological structure]] (which is really [[topological space]] now).
   *  Moved stuff from [[connection]] to [[connection on a bundle]].  It\'s possible that much of the latter could be put on a more specific page, something like [[parallel transport]] (which currently redirects).
   *  A bit more at [[continuous map]].
   *  A suggestion for [[Zoran Škoda]] at [[differential form]].

      * Zoran: it seems you misunderstood the question, see my answer there. It is not about generalizations. 
   *  Added links and such to [[nonabelian algebraic topology]].  Normally I don\'t log this sort of thing, but as much of this is a personal essay, I want [[Ronnie Brown]] to make sure that I didn\'t warp anything.


## 2009-08-20

*  [[Roger Witte]] has joined us with an edit to [[category theory]].

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: added several (very carefully chosen, though I am not competent enough) references into [[BPS-state]]. 

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: split off [[monoidal Dold-Kan correspondence]] from [[Dold-Kan correspondence]] -- moved the material in the original section at the latter to the former and linked back and forth -- moreover I added a section _Lax monoidalness of the Moore cochain complex functor_ where I claim to prove the statement asserted by this headline. CHECK.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created an outline for the [[BPS-state]], expanded [[group theory]]. I side with Mike with long-surpressed urge to have nice conceptual explanation of the terminology semantics-structure adjunction.

* [[Mike Shulman]]: Corrected a handedness error I made in my initial reply at [[monadic adjunction]], and made a request: can anyone give a nice conceptual explanation of the terminology "semantics-structure adjunction"?

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: expanded slightly [[geometry]], [[diffeomorphism]] and much [[topology]] (with groupings of similar items, few hours of work), created [[Hurewicz connection]], [[continuous map]] and a stub for [[diffeity]] with few references. Additions to [[connection]]. 

  * [[David Corfield]]: Are you sure it isn't 'diffiety'? That would match 'variety' better.
  * Zoran: Oh, yes, thanks, [[diffiety]]!!
* [[Urs Schreiber]]: added the standard singular cohomology version to [[cup product]]

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[projection measure]]. I agree with Toby that, in common convention in published literature, if one uses a German phrase involving word Satz (like in his Theorem example) one will still write it with capital letter. As a physicist, I witness and referree papers on daily basis which are using the word Ansatz in English physics texts, as rule capitalized. Mathematicians do not like the term and logic of using something as a means to solve the problem if it is not justified a priori (one mathematician was telling me words of disgust: "what is physics ? Nothing! Ansatz!").
I posted a query under [[differential form]] on interpretations as inner hom, i.e. functions on $\Pi TM$.  

* [[Ronnie Brown]]: I have rewritten [[nonabelian algebraic topology]] to incorporate historical comments I made made on discussion lists, and so to show my experience of the relation with [[nonabelian cohomology]]. 

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: reacted to [[David Roberts]]' latest comment at [[category theory]] by expaning the item on "categories = 1d spaces" with a discussion of one way how this statement can be thought of as being made precise
 
* [[Mike Shulman]]: continued discussion at [[monotone function]].

* [[David Roberts]]: comment at [[category theory]] re category as a sort of directed space.

*  [[Lab Elf|Lab Elf (wildebeest department)]]:  We will be migrating the entire $n$-Category Lab to a new server soon.  Please see [the announcement on the Café](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/08/nlab_migration.html) and report there all of the many problems!

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  I did as David urged below; see [[category theory]] and [[universe]].

* [[David Roberts]]: Re: [[category theory]] - Toby, go ahead. In particular, I found last night the [[foundations and philosophy]] page about which some comments were directed (the people involved, including me, didn't know it already existed). There is a link to a paper on [[category theory]] about structuralism which might go there, as well as the (short) discussion surrounding it.

  * [[David Corfield]]: re [[foundations and philosophy]], I can't do more than log its creation here (see 2009-08-17). Now to find time to write it up.

  * [[Andrew Stacey]]: I'm hesitant to weigh in on this as I'm as guilty as everyone else, but merely flagging something here is not really enough.  We should all think about how to organise the material here to make it easily findable.  Of course, linking from related page to related page is good, but there should also be some hierarchical organisation.  For example, there should be a philosophy index page and [[foundations and philosophy]] should be on it.  Perhaps, appropriately enough, we should make more use of the [category](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/instiki/show/Categories) features in Instiki.  At the moment, we have the following categories: biography, category, delete, drafts, foundational axiom, lexicon, meta, people, place, redirect, reference, spam.

   This comment is getting a little long, so I've started a [forum discussion](http://www.math.ntnu.no/~stacey/Vanilla/nForum/comments.php?DiscussionID=53) with more details on how to implement this, so please reply there.
    

## 2009-08-19

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Reading Zoran\'s work reminds me that there\'s another way to interpretation notation for an integral, which I\'ve now recorded at [[measure space]].  (I think that capitalising the 'N' in 'Nullstellensatz' in English is like capitalising the 'T' in '[Cantor\'s Theorem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cantor's_Theorem)', but I\'m not going to worry about it in a world with redirects.)

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: added standard references to [[commutative algebra]] and links to Murfet's online notes. [[Nullstellensatz]] as a German noun compound starts with a capital letter, and it is usually (though not always) quoted so in English references.  

* [[Toby Bartels]]:  Created [[algebraically closed field]].

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[commutative algebra]] both for the notion of a commutative $k$-algebra and the subject of _the_ commutative algebra, which is one of the foundations of algebraic geometry. I have removed the redirect commutative algebra from [[associative unital algebra]]. Toby: a variety is an affine, quasiaffine, projective or quasiprojective variety. Hence if one talks about the category of all varieties, then all of those are objects simultaneously, and not by convention of choice. True enough quasiprojective includes all others as the affine space is a Zariski open subset of the projective space. I corrected nonlogical usage of the maximal compact to the maximal torus. The thing is that I usually use K for maximal compact in G which is complex, and now I used G for compact and $G^C$ for complexification, so in my normal notation it would be $K/T=G/B$ where $T$ is the maximal torus. Once I lost $K$ in the complexification notation I put it automatically at the place of the torus. Of course $SL(n,C)/B = SU(n)/T$, what is called Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization procedure :) Thanks for  catching the inconsistency in language. I will use $T$ now and remove $K$ everywhere (better I used my notation). 

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  A question at [[flag variety]], and also a brief question at [[algebraic variety]].
   *  Responded to Mike at [[monotone function]].  What I have there is not quite right, but I\'ll let Mike react before I have another go.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[algebraic variety]], additions to [[integral scheme]] and lists [[mathematics]],[[geometry]]

* [[Toby Bartels]]:  I\'m going to mess with [[category theory]] again, if somebody doesn\'t stop me.

* [[Mike Shulman]]:

  * Definitional question at [[monotone function]].
  * Agreed with Toby's edit at [[equipment]] and removed query box.
  * Comment and question at [[homotopy hypothesis]].

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: after lots of work expanded the entry list for [[geometry]] (the first try was eaten up by internet explorer: nlab server did not accept my first submission and IE does not allow going back to the data (while never had this problem with firefox -- just can go back to the form with data still in)).

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: added a bit more on the monoidalness and the shuffle map at [[Dold-Kan correspondence]]

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[flag variety]], [[Borel-Weil theorem]] and expanded [[coherent state]] 

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: following [[David Roberts]]'s reaction below I took the following action at [[category theory]]

  * I split the item on "categories as spaces" and "categories as mathematical universes" in two
 
  * I edited a bit the statement about them being spaces

  * then in the item on categories as mathematical universes I pasted in the paragraphs that me and David Roberts had suggested in the quesry box discussion below. 

* [[David Roberts]]: responded to Urs' suggestion at [[category theory]] with one edited from his. We need to wrap up some of the discussion there, in particular, and, in my opinion, remove some points that would probably not be considered core to an introductory page on category theory - I hesitate to say \'points that are not generally supported by the category theory community\' because I know that there are some new and/or minority points of view that are enlightening. Certainly a couple of the extended discussions might be moved to a discussion section. I blame the lateness of the hour in Adelaide for not doing that particular task myself.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[coherent state]] (it will be much longer later)

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: replied at [[category theory]] by suggesting as an alternative an expanded version of the sentence on "mathematical universes" under discussion.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: additions and changes to [[symplectic geometry]]

* [[Lab Elf|Lab Elf (golf department)]]: added an entry at the [[HowTo| How To]] on how to put parentheses (and other "unsafe" characters) in links.

* [[David Roberts]]: comment at [[category theory]] - nothing substantial, just adding my voice to Toby's comment.

*  [[Omar Antolín-Camarena]]: added a section to [[adjoint functor theorem]] about the version for presentable (∞,1)-categories.

*  [[Omar Antolín-Camarena]]: created [[solution set condition]] (has link from [[adjoint functor theorem]]).


## 2009-08-18

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Comments at [[equipment]] and [[category theory]].

* [[Urs Schreiber]] much as I regret it, I still have complaints -- but also constructive suggestions -- in the discussion at [[category theory]]

  and i notice that a long discussion in a query box is getting cumbersome. Maybe we should move that to the blog. 

* [[Mike Shulman]]

  * commented on one discussion at [[category theory]]

  * finally created [[equipment]]

  * replied at [[monadic adjunction]]

* [[Urs Schreiber]]

  * added "Idea" section to [[generalized complex geometry]]

  * created [[geometric quantization]] collecting some links and importing John's old material from [here](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/quantization.html)

  * created [[symplectic geometry]] with just some things to come back to later

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[Leibniz algebra]]

* [[Urs Schreiber]]

  * added to [[groupoid cardinality]] the general definition for [[infinity-groupoid]]s as well as a handful of further examples

  * started working on the entry [[exercise in groupoidification - the path integral]]

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Wrote [[variety of algebras]].

* [[Urs Schreiber]]

  * created a stub for [[quantization]]

  * renamed [[Jim Stasheff]]'s entry [[Larmore]] into [[Larmore twisted cohomology]] and edited it; linked to it from the reference section at [[twisted cohomology]]

  * made [[Chu space]] a redirect to [[Chu construction]]

  * created entry for [[Michael Barr]]

* [[John Baez]]: 

   * added more references to [[Batanin omega-category]], especially references that discuss modelling homotopy types using Batanin omega-groupoids.

   * added a reference to Simona Paoli's paper at [[homotopy hypothesis]].  This contains an answer to Urs' question about the functor that turns spaces into $cat^n$ groups.   I also moved his question down to the 'Discussion' section near the end of the page.

   * posed a question on [[monadic adjunction]].  The end of my question contains a formatting error of the sort Toby knows how to fix!  I forget how!

*  [[Jim Stasheff]] wrote [[Larmore]]; I\'m not sure if it\'s supposed to be about the person or about a cohomology theory.

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Started [[monadic adjunction]], doing only the definition in $Cat$.
   *  Since [[geometric function object]] didn\'t exist and at least one link to [[examples for geometric function objects]] was misdirected, I moved the latter to the former, at least for now, and put in redirects.


## 2009-08-17

* [[Urs Schreiber]]:

  * found time to expand the discussion at [[examples for geometric function objects]] -- now this contains details on the simplest but somewhat archetypical example: that of over-categories. This is really the notion of geometric $\infty$-functions that is implicit in [[John Baez]]' notion of [[groupoidification]]. I am thinking that making its structure in the context of geometric $\infty$-function theory explicit is useful for putting this together with the discussion at [[geometric infinity-function theory]] into perspective. Will try to say more about the other examples indicated tomorrow.

  * slightly edited and updated links at [[geometric function theory]] -- one of them now points to the new [[examples for geometric function objects]], which however is still to be written, but I have to interrupt for a moment

  * created entry for [[Michael Batanin]]

  * created stub for [[Batanin omega-category]]

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:

   *  Cleaned up [[twisted cohomology]]; there\'s still a link to Urs\'s web that\'s broken.   

      * [[Urs Schreiber]]: yeah, sorry, I keep working on this at my private web with [[Jim Stasheff]] and then from time to time Jim makes me move the stuff to the public page -- but we'll try to stop doing that now and just edit the public page -- sorry again
   *  Noted the compact nature of the [[Gelfand spectrum]] (also at [[maximal spectrum]]).
   *  Mentioned $B^*$-algebras at [[operator algebra]]; but I really need to write [[C-star-algebra]].

* [[Urs Schreiber]]

  * filled [[T-duality]] with a bit of content (motivation being to link to the Cavalcanti-Gualtieri article now linked to there)

  * created stub entry for our esteemed new contributor professor [[Andrew Ranicki]]

* activity at [[twisted cohomology]]:

  * [[Jim Stasheff]] added a long list with chronology of references on twisted cohomology

  * [[Andrew Ranicki]] added a hyperlink to a reference (as far as I, [[Urs Schreiber]], can tell from the logs)

  * [[Urs Schreiber]] 

    * edited Jim Staheff's chronology slightly

    * and replaced the bulk of the entry with a newer version as it has evolved meanwhile in interaction between Urs and Jim at Urs' private web -- the new version has a longer motivational piece and includes details on the proof that and how the fibration-sequence definition of twisted cohomology that is used here reproduces the traditional one in terms of sections of bundles of spectra as a special case

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: 

  * created [[transversal maps]]

  * expanded [[generalized smooth algebra]], adding more theorems, links and remarks (also corrected some minor mistakes in the previous version) -- but I also suffered a stupid data loss due to the system having an "internal error" and myself srewing up the backup copy of my edit and had to type everything twice. Hopefully I didn't delete unintentionally old content this way...

  * created a stub entry for our new esteemed contributor, Prof. [[Charles Wells]]

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created very incomplete entries [[operator algebra]], [[maximal ideal]], [[Gelfand spectrum]]. I have mentioned mostly just the unital case, as the nonunital case will be more tricky when completed. 

* [[David Corfield]]: Started [[ideal completion]] and [[foundations and philosophy]].

* [[Charles Wells]] Lightly edited [[category theory]], notably introducing posets as another example of a category.

   * Hey!  We're honored to have you here, Prof. Wells! -- [[John Baez]]


## 2009-08-16

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  More talk on [[category theory]].  Also note the existence of the article [[foundations]]; there\'s not a lot of philosophy there, but there could be and probably should be.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[coquasitriangular bialgebra]], [[cosemisimple coalgebra]]; added the redirect [[corepresentation]] and few words on this terminology to [[comodule]]

* [[David Roberts]]: More discussion at [[category theory]]. There are some statements that need unraveling, and I don't quite feel up to it. In particular, [[Rafael Borowiecki]] pointed out the need for a philosophical page on foundations, as he referenced a paper on structuralism, sets and categories I didn't feel fitted on [[category theory]] (or at least in the section where it was referenced). So maybe this is a plea to David Corfield, who is more qualified to talk about such things than I.

   * [[David Corfield]] I'd be happy to help how I can. I've started a page [[foundations and philosophy]], to be expanded.


## 2009-08-15

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Started [[prime ideal theorem]] and [[maximal ideal theorem]].  Eventually I\'d like to have precise equivalences of these, constructively valid (preferably in any pretopos), to various forms of choice, with proofs.  Now is just a list of very basic results, possibly valid only in a model of ETCS.

* [[Zoran Škoda]] created [[homotopical algebra]] as  a rather terminologically-historical entry (as opposed to more descriptive and concrete [[homotopy theory]] and compared to [[homological algebra]]); created [[quasitriangular bialgebra]] with redirects [[quasitriangular Hopf algebra]] and [[universal R-element]]. Added links to [[mathematics]], [[algebra]] and maybe to some more entry(s).

*  [[John Baez]]: Why does the main front page look so weird?  Did the site get moved to a new host, or is it the result of an alien invasion?
   
   * Hmm, now it's back to normal.

   * [[Urs Schreiber]]: I can't tell what happened. Andrew is indeed preparing the migration and has set up the nLab on another server by now. That shouldn't affect what's going on here. Or might it be that the phenomenon was something just on your side? What was it actually?

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  I was thinking of writing articles on $\Omega$-[[Omega-group|groups]] and [[Malcev variety|Мальцев varieties]] to talk about [[ideals]] in them.  I agree that three articles, one on that subject, one on ideals in rings (and rigs, maybe even monoid objects in general) and one on lattices (and other partially ordered or preordered sets), would be a good idea.


## 2009-08-14

* [[Zoran Škoda]] created [[quantum group]], additions to [[fiber bundle]], [[Hopf-Galois extension]] and [[Timeline of category theory and related mathematics]] including a query discussion and 1970 Timeline entry for [[Benabou-Roubaud theorem]]. Some thoughts on [[ideal]] entry. Toby, I think we should eventually have an entry which would have a general and lattice notions of [[ideal]] separated from the entry for rings/algebras. Otherwise half of the entry is incomprehensible for ring/algebra theorists. For example for noncommutative rings commutative notion of prime ideal splits into nonequivalent notions of prime and completely prime ideals (just to start, compare also primitive etc.), which are now difficult even to list as the rest of the list is lattice-worded. So I would opt to have a general entry and specialized entries for lattices, rings/algebras. Another interesting context are [[$\Omega$-groups]] (additively written not necessarily commutative groups with a family of operations, not necessarily unary ones which distribute over group "addition"; I am going to add a stub now) where ideals correspond to quotient $\Omega$-groups; interesting is to compare those version of ideals to the categorical notions of normal subobject. Thus we have ideals for sheaves of rings (e.g. defining ideal of a subvariety) etc. 

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Added principal ideals to [[ideal]].

* [[Zoran Škoda]] created [[flabby sheaf]]

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Wrote [[implication]].
   *  Pretty stubby biographies for [[Peter Johnstone]] and [[Paul Taylor]].

* [[David Roberts]]: More comments at [[category theory]], this time to statements in the section about the contrast with set theory due to [[Rafael Borowiecki]].

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Added some stuff on morphisms to [[partial order]], [[semilattice]], [[lattice]], [[Heyting algebra]], [[Boolean algebra]].
   *  Wrote [[monotone function]], with a question on terminology, the sort that could be answered through the literature for once!

*  [[Rafael Borowiecki]]:
   *  wants more details for Zoran\'s entries at [[Timeline of category theory and related mathematics]].
   *  added some definitions to [[A-infinity-category]].

* [[David Roberts]] added to the discussion at [[category theory]]. 


## 2009-08-13

* [[Zoran Škoda]] created [[Benabou-Roubaud theorem]]

* [[Urs Schreiber]]

  * created [[equivalence of quasi-categories]] -- at the moment just to record a useful lemma

  * added various new links to the list at [[Higher Topos Theory]] -- also edited the paragraphs at the beginning a little

  * removed the old and meanwhile highly incomplete link list at [[sheaf and topos theory]] and instead included links to our main link list pages on these topics -- would be nice if eventually we'd find the time to write a nice overview and exposition here on par with that at [[category theory]]

  * created [[model structure on marked simplicial over-sets]] -- this is used to model the $(\infty,1)$-categorical [[Grothendieck construction]], so I edited the latter accordingly

  * renamed [[right proper model category]] to [[proper model category]] and added the missing cases.


*  [[Rafael Borowiecki]] is back at [[category theory]].

* [[Urs Schreiber]]

  * added an "Idea" section to [[cartesian morphism]]

  * started adding details on the relation between $(\infty,1)$[[Cartesian fibration]]s and [[(infinity,1)-presheaves]] to [[universal fibration of (infinity,1)-categories]] -- not sure yet where this material should ultimately go: this is really the $(\infty,1)$-Grothendieck construction. Maybe it should be at [[Cartesian fibration]].


## 2009-08-12

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: 

  * created [[marked simplicial set]]

  * created [[(infinity,1)-category of cartesian sections]]

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Went through Section 1.1 of [[Stone Spaces]]; see the links from there.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: 

  * added to [[Grothendieck construction]] the definition in terms of pullback of the "universal Cat-bundle" -- and added pointers to Grothendieck fibration and to category of elements at [[generalized universal bundle]]

  * created [[fibrations of simplicial sets]]

  * added to [[Kan fibration]] a sentence on right/left Kan fibrations and made [[inner Kan fibration]], [[left Kan fibration]], [[right Kan fibration]] and [[weak Kan fibration]] redirect to it

  * made [[lifting property]] a redirect to [[weak factorization system]]

  * created [[anodyne morphism]]

  * started [[cartesian morphism]] in order to host, among the standard stuff, the $(\infty,1)$-categorical version

  * corrected some minor points at [[limit in a quasi-category]] a bit

  * created [[Karoubi envelope]] in order to collect references to the $\infty$-version of it

  * expanded [[universal fibration of (infinity,1)-categories]]

  * added a section "Idea" and a section "Generalization" to [[Grothendieck construction]]

  * added an "Idea" section and started a section "Properties" at [[Cartesian fibration]]

  * added some links to K-theoretic issues that have meanwhile come into existence at [[Grothendieck construction]]. 

    Concerning the comment there: my feeling is that people pretty consistently use the term "Grothendieck construction" for the reconstruction of a fibration from a pseudofunctor, whereas for the K-theoretic aspect they say "Grothendieck group".

  * added pointers to the entry [[Cartesian fibration]] at [[fibered category]] and [[Grothendieck fibration]]

  * added to the discussion on universal fibrations at [[stuff, structure, property]] (in the section on logic) a comment about and pointer to the [[universal fibration of (∞,1)-categories]].


## 2009-08-11

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  I also put up quite the stub at [[trivial bundle]].
   *  OK, now [[fiber bundle]] exists.

*  [[Andreas Holmstrom]] has created a user page, including a link to a blog.

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Noticed that [[fiber bundle]] redirects to [[bundle]], but that page merely lists a fiber bundle (linking to itself!) as one of several kinds of bundle, so removed the redirect.  So if you thought that that page existed, well, it doesn\'t!
   *  Noticed links to [[fiber]] and wrote a bit there.
   *  More edits to [[pullback stability]].

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: added to [[pullback stability]] that of right lifting property and hence that of fibrations -- restructured a bit.

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Added a note that there also other kinds of [[pullback stability]]; for example, the sense in which monomorphisms are stable under pullback.
   *  Some rephrasing and refactoring at [[pretopos]] too.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: created [[pullback stability]] to satisfy links, but included so far just a pointer to [[commutativity of limits and colimits]]. Maybe we want to split that latter entry into the relevant subentries.

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Expanded and rephrased [[topos]].
   *  Decided to create [[Giraud's axioms]], realised that everything that I wanted to say was already at [[Grothendieck topos]], and so made a redirect instead.  (This is not to say that one couldn\'t split it off later, however.)

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: created [[universal fibration of (∞,1)-categories]] and linked to it from [[generalized universal bundle]] and [[limit in a quasi-category]].

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[normal variety]]

* [[Urs Schreiber]] added [[universal colimits]] as the last remaining entry on the four [[Giraud's axioms]] that was still missing at [[(infinity,1)-topos]]. The entry currently points to the relevant discussion at [[commutativity of limits and colimits]] for the content, but is supposed to serve for providing the particular terminology used here.


## 2009-08-10

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Contents at [[Stone Spaces]].  I hope to go through at least the first 4 chapters and relearn all of the topology there that I already know, only now in terms of locales (and hopefully constructively).  As I do so, I\'ll write it up here.
   *  Added a note on $2$-[[2-colimit|colimits]] to [[2-limit]].

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: created [[Thomason model category]]

* [[Eric]]: Based on a discussion at the [nCafe](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/08/what_do_mathematicians_need_to.html#c025838), I created [[Online Resources]].

* [[Andrew Stacey]] marked his return with a small but significant observation about extensions of the category of smooth manifolds: if the inclusion of manifolds into an extension category preserves limits and colimits then the extension category _cannot_ be locally cartesian closed.  At the moment, this is contained in a remark at the end of the third example of a [[Froelicher space]] - please check my reasoning!

  (I'd like to be able to say that I figured this out whilst flying over Damascus, but I think it was actually Novosibirsk.)


## 2009-08-09

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Invited [[Hopfian group]] to be generalised to other categories.
   *  Started [[free group]].
   *  Noted that the [[free product]] is the coproduct in $Grp$.
   *  Added a note on the constructive validity of the [[Nielsen–Schreier theorem]].

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[combinatorial group theory]], [[free product of groups]], [[Nielsen-Schreier theorem]], [[Hopfian group]]; quoted references for algebraic proofs of Nielsen-Schreier, somebody should add a reference with explanation of the topological proof (I think Massey's book would do but I do not have it at the moment).


## 2009-08-07

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: added to [[category algebra]] the description of (at least groupoid algebras) in terms of the weak colimit over the constand 2-functor to $Vect-Mod$. That's kind of remarkable. I have to admit to my shame that I wasn't aware of this fact before. It's extracted from Free-Hopkins-Lurie-Teleman's latest, where it is the starting point for a huge story.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: I will most likely be on vacation for next about 10 days, what means mainly offline, though I hope to contribute with an item here and there within that period. To live safely (=with nlab) when offline I downloaded the whole html version of the site which I backed up online at my institute's server (which is pretty well working). Here is the today's file [nlab.tar.gz](http://www.irb.hr/korisnici/zskoda/nlab.tar.gz), only about 10Mb but with 77 Mb after gunzipping back to tar and about the same after untarring. Of course I will not update this file at least till full return back. 

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Wrote [[Stone Spaces]] (about Johnstone\'s book); contents to come.
   *  Edited [[simple object]] and [[semisimple object]] to clarify that the zero object is semisimple but not simple.
   *  I was pretty sure, Zoran, but since it wasn\'t my field, I wanted to warn you.

* [[Zoran Škoda]] surely Toby, this is true for any fixed object $M$ (I wrote subobject?? hmm last night I entered a wrong building instead of the one in which my flat is). Just created [[coherent sheaf]]; because of severe time constraints it is rather short for a significant entry which will be large in future.  

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Rewrote the definition at [[property sup]] slightly; it seems to me that $\Omega$ should be an ascending chain of subobjects of a fixed object $M$, rather than an ascending chain of a fixed subobject $M$ (which I can\'t even parse).  That also fits in with a noetherian category\'s having the property, but I mention it here in case I\'m wrong.

*  [[Aleks Kissinger]] has joined us, adding examples to [[dagger category]].

* [[Zoran Škoda]] created short entries [[simple object]], [[semisimple object]], [[socle]], [[nilpotent ideal]]; noticed that if I create a redirect ((apples)) for ((apple)) and used it in ((pear)), the entry ((apple)) is NOT listed in the list of "linked from" entries at the bottom of the page. Thus if I link by a redirect name, I will miss the backpointer. This happened with [[simple objects]] listed in [[semisimple object]], but [[simple object]] does not say that it is linked from [[semisimple object]]. Added more to [[artinian ring]]. Toby, I agree that $n Cat$ and $n$-$Cat$ are accepted synonyms, that hyphen looks better than minus, and that there is no <em>a priori</em> rational reason for $R$-$Mod$ as opposed to $R Mod$, however the tradition in math community and in professional typerighting (say in numerous journals of AMS) do not use $R Mod$, at least not noticably often, in favour of other versions, and if nlab has strange (even if abstractly correct) conventions in conventional part of math, it may be less attractive to students and professionals. Additional confusion may arise in confusion the name $R$ or so before $Mod$ with a modifier like $gr$, $dg$, $co$ or alike, which are more often (and with stronger arguments) in tradition written without hyphen.  

  * expanded [[germ]]; created (Gabriel's) [[property sup]] with redirect [[property (sup)]]. 

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: expanded and rearranged [[germ]] a bit


## 2009-08-06

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Added to [[germ]] the example that causes me to keep linking to it.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: created [[germ]], added references to [[group cohomology]] on continuous/smooth case

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Moved [[double of algebra with involution]] to [[Cayley-Dickson construction]] to use the nice name, and added the reference where I first learnt about this stuff.
   *  The problem with ‘$R-Mod$’ is that it contains a minus sign, not a dash at all.  I\'ve been removing minus signs from ‘$R-Mod$’, ‘$k-Vect$’, ‘$n-Cat$’ etc because they seem entirely wrong, and replacing them with nothing on the grounds that nothing is needed there (except a space, which should come automatically) in a mathematical formula.  If you really want a minus sign, let me know, and I won\'t change it.  If you want a dash, you can use `$R$-$Mod$` (which won\'t work inside a displayed equation), `$R\text{-}Mod$`, or `$R&#x2010;Mod$` (which is a little funky but arguably the most proper).  I will change minus signs to one of those from now on, if that is what you prefer.  (Of course, `$_R Mod$` also works.)  Compare: ‘$R-Mod$’, ‘$R Mod$’, ‘$R$-$Mod$’, ‘$R\text{-}Mod$’, ‘$R&#x2010;Mod$’, ‘$_R Mod$’.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: added a section "Details" to the end of [[(infinity,1)-quantity]] to go with the blog discussion [here](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/08/question_on_synthetic_differen.html#c025770)

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: started [[Bredon cohomology]] and a stub for [[Mackey functor]] with few references.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: created [[superconnection]]

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[double of algebra with involution]],[[alternative algebra]],[[nilpotent element]], [[Azumaya algebra]]. We should have things much more detailed and explicit here, e.g. showing the correspondence between sheaves of Azumaya algebras and abelian gerbes...Though Duskin's construction of Azumaya complex deserves a separate entry of course and the Brower group does as well. Toby why do you use nonstandard $R Mod$ instead of $R-Mod$ or ${}_R Mod$ -- the standard algebraic literature places either dash or places $R$ in subscript...and it is even more weird for right modules with $Mod R$. 

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Added a constructive bit to [[integral domain]].
   *  Split [[artinian ring]] (just a stub) off from [[noetherian ring]].

* [[David Roberts]]: added comment to [[fundamental groupoid]] about topology thereon and relation to local connectedness. In other news, I have a (non-academic) job, so as of next week my contributions will slow down a bit.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created several shorter entries [[open subscheme]], [[open immersion of schemes]], [[reduced scheme]], [[integral scheme]], [[integral domain]], [[noetherian scheme]] (warning: the listed proposition is not that obvious to prove) and made some changes to [[noetherian ring]]. 


## 2009-08-05

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Wrote [[compactum]].
   *  Expanded [[algebra for an endofunctor]] to actually include [[algebra for a monad]] (which has redirected there for some time).
   *  Wrote [[overt space]].
   *  Numbered and added to the definitions at [[compact space]].
   *  Wrote [[interval]].

* [[Eric]]: Created [[Hasse diagram]]. It may need polishing to make it technically (and morally) correct.

* [[Sridhar Ramesh]]: The article on [[Kleisli category]] erroneously made the remark that the free functor associated with an Eilenberg-Moore category would necessarily be faithful (as a simple counterexample, consider the monad on Set which sends everything to 1); I've reworded the line which stated this, as well as one other

  * [[Zoran Škoda]]: thanks, I wrote this nonsense trying to quickly motivate the existence of two definitions of Kleisli category (I consider the one via morphisms $M\to TN$ more basic than as free algebras in fact) and while writing I said to myself this can't be (faithfulness) but quickly made up some ad hoc false arguments in my head to the opposite and continued writing this :) Somebody should write [[Kleisli object]] as well (following Street 1972 and Lack-Street 2002). 


## 2009-08-04

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[coherent module]], [[noetherian category]] (containing also some material on _locally noetherian_ abelian categories), [[Hilbert's basis theorem]], [[noetherian ring]], [[noetherian object]], [[irreducible topological space]], [[noetherian topological space]], [[integrable system]], [[differential topology]], [[general topology]], [[algebraic approaches to differential calculus]], [[skewfield]] (with redirect 'division ring'; I chose 1-word synonym as a main version however). Some users (outside of the contributor community) asked for more browsing access to nlab, namely to be able to descend to entries in specific subfields differently than via the long all pages list, or guessing and google search for notions; thus I gave small contribution to this by expanding [[algebra]], [[topology and geometry]] and [[mathematics]]; I do not think that we should care to ever have something like a complete tree, but having overview entries with lots of links in subfields will create more awareness of non-obvious entries. I also think that the descent from anything like top entries to concrete entries should not be unique in general and link overlap whenever logical and intelligent cross-referencing would not hurt. I have moved much of the material from [[reconstruction theorem]] to [[Lawvere's reconstruction theorem]] and added a link to latter and few more references, mainly for Tannakian and scheme cases. 

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Discussion at [[directed graph]].
   *  Added [[characteristic morphism]] to [[characteristic function]].

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: Created [[exact sequence of Hopf algebras]] (well, for now short exact). 
Oh John, you gave me an opportunity for recalling some sweet memories: I clumsily used word lazy for a lack of interaction (actually a barrier of shyness/fear between experts and non-experts) at a summer school on geometry and strings in 1999 and got excommunicated there for about a week :) 

* [[John Baez]]: What, I'm the first one working on the $n$Lab and it's already past noon (in Paris)?  The rest of you must be getting lazy!  :-)  I added a little bit about cosimplicial objects vs cochain complexes to [[Dold-Kan correspondence]].


## 2009-08-03

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: To assist [[John Baez]]'s links, created [[Eilenberg-Moore category]], [[Kleisli category]] and added details and redirects to [[monadic functor]]. To John's question: I think most basic facts in Tannaka reconstruction including sort of those on coalgebra level are in chapter 3 of [Bodo Pareigis' online notes](http://www.mathematik.uni-muenchen.de/~pareigis/pa_schft.html); his emphasis is on [[end]]s and coends. However I hope you find Kazhdan's notes, they must be great. I created entry [[Tomasz Maszczyk]] with very interesting past seminar abstract at the bottom relating a new reconstruction theorem coming from nc geometry. 

  * [[John Baez]]: thanks for the reference to Pareigis' online notes!  I'll look at them sometime --- I hadn't known about them.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: expanded the example list at [[twisted cohomology]] -- in particular added "cohomology with local coefficients" as a special case. Added to the very beginning of [[local system]] a paragraph on how strictly speaking local systems were meant to be such "local systems of coefficients".

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[smooth scheme]], [[flat morphism]], [[smooth morphism of schemes]], [[EGA IV]], [[locally affine space]], [[relativization in algebraic geometry]]. Notice that this is extending a series on regularity/smoothness/differential calculus in algebraic framework which included our earlier entries [[regular differential operator]], [[quasi-free dga]], [[formally smooth morphism]] and so on.
  
  * John and Ramesh thank you for the nice detailed material on Lawvere reconstruction theorem, I'd suggest to create a separate lab entry [[Lawvere reconstruction theorem]] on it, moving the most of the material there (regarding the size and number of other reconstruction theorems waiting to be covered in detail the same way) with a link and short comment on the main [[reconstruction]] page.   

  * [[John Baez]]: that's fine --- go ahead and do it!  We can talk about all the reconstruction theorems on the [[reconstruction]] page, but put details on separate pages.  I'd been wanting to write a _book_ about reconstruction theorems, but this will either help me write it or help eliminate the need for doing so.
  
  * [[Zoran Škoda]]: Done, now we have separate [[Lawvere's reconstruction theorem]] and a sentence on its content with the link at [[reconstruction theorem]].

* [[John Baez]] expanded [[reconstruction theorem]] by adding the example Lawvere theories.

  * [[Sridhar Ramesh]] expanded this a little more, in particular discussing the infinitary analogue of Lawvere's reconstruction theorem and the monadic perspective on this, as well as cursorily noting how this is all nothing more and nothing less than the Yoneda embedding lemma cast into logical guise

* [[Urs Schreiber]] created [[Chevalley-Eilenberg cochain complex]]

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: posted _[[jibladzeCoeffLargeCats.djvu:file]]_ and linked it to [[crossed profunctor]].  Urs, how the integration approach to diff. forms fits with existance of classes of smooth, $C^1$-only, $L^1$-integrable etc. differential forms and the currents ("differential form-valued distributions"), and it seems it puts n-forms on n-manifolds in special position, than say k-forms on n-manifolds. There is a subject of geometric integration theory where integrability is related to geometric properties like rectifiability (Federer); how this fits with that. And finally with differential forms on singular varieties. It seems to me that this approach has advantages and applicability in some cases, while the easy approach via dualizing vector fields to get 1-forms and then proceeding algebraically in others. One should maybe also compare to Lurie's usage of cotangent bundle in expressing an alternative approach to higher descent. 

  * [[Urs Schreiber]]: there are many aspects to this, but what I wrote lives in the entirely smooth context. The integration map is that from Reyes-Moerdijk section 4 , which integrates "synthetic" forms over "synthetic" simplices. Technique-wise this is really rather conservative, the only new twist to it is that I am saying: its helpful to arrange some objects that people consider in the synthetic context into cosimplicial objects, that reveals some nice underlying structure.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: 

  *  created [[(infinity,1)-quantity]] -- some comments:

     * this accompanies a blog question [here](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/08/question_on_synthetic_differen.html)

     * among other things this aims to provide the full general nonsense $\infty$-version of the statement at the beginning of [[differential form]]

     * I could move this to my private web. Let me know if you feel that would be better.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[crossed profunctor]] (of crossed modules) and [[butterfly]] (papillon). First after M. Jibladze (1990) and second after B. Noohi (2005). I did not draw the diagram but wrote equations explicitly.

* [[Eric]]:

  * Gleefully responded to John's gleeful response on [[directed graph]]. Note: I need to learn about this 'resolution' stuff.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[reconstruction theorem]]. There should eventually be separate entries for each of the main classes and examples, which are listed in the main entry.

  * [[John Baez]]: I love the idea of an article full of [[reconstruction theorems]]!  I contributed one, perhaps not quite the sort Zoran was thinking --- but I just happened to have it on hand, and I think with some work one can see that it's part of the big family of Tannaka--Krein-like results.  By the way, I took a course with Kazhdan in which he went through tons of Tannaka--Krein--like theorems, but I've been unable to find my notes from that course!  He started with a very primitive (and thus important) result saying something like this: any $k$-linear abelian category with a faithful functor to $FinVect_k$ is equivalent to the category of finite-dimensional representations of some coalgebra.  Does anyone know a reference to this sort of theorem?  It's crucial that we use _co_algebras here.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: 

  * added something on the dual Dold-Kan correspondence relating _co_ -chain complexes and co-simplicial abelian groups to [[Dold-Kan correspondence]].

  * renamed differentials at [[chain complex]] from "$d$" to "$\partial$"

  * expanded [[cochain complex]]

  * created [[differential forms in synthetic differential geometry]] with two purposes: it reviews the definition found in the literature and then proposes a -- supposedly nicer -- reformulation

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: added a query in [[compact object]]: the stated characterization of categories of $R$-modules is known at least about 3 decades before Ginzburg's lectures. Maybe we should look into classical sources.

* [[John Baez]]: 

  * Added theorem characterizing categories of $R$-modules to [[compact object]].

  * Added same theorem and also the Mitchell embedding theorem to [[abelian category]].

  * Gleefully shot down an idea of Eric's over at [[directed graph]] --- but this idea can be resuscitated using the concept of 'resolution'.

* [[Sridhar Ramesh]] added a small note that [[Lawvere-Tierney topology|Lawvere-Tierney topologies]] are the same as (internal) closure operators on truth values (Being new here, I'm not exactly sure what the protocols are; in "Please log all your non-trivial changes", does "non-trivial" mean everything above, say, typo-correction?). I also observed, in the article on [[presheaf|presheaves]], that the representable presheaves on a category of presheaves are precisely those which turn colimits into limits (i.e., a functor of type $[C, Set]^{op} \to Set$ is representable just in case it is limit-preserving).

  * [[Urs Schreiber]]: I added a remark to the text above on what "non-trivial" means. Generally, I think you can't log too much of your activity here, just too little. So if in doubt whether anyone else might be interested in your changes or not, drop a note here.

  *  [[John Baez]]: Welcome, Sridhar Ramesh!  I'd like to add: we are not trying to force you to do lots of bureaucratic work, so please don't feel we are _demanding_ you to log changes here.  If you make a change and feel too tired to log it here, we won't be mad at you.  We just _like_ to see changes here, even smallish ones.

* [[Eric]]: Asked a question of [[Mike Shulman|Mike]] (or anyone else interested in SDG) at [[synthetic differential geometry]].


## 2009-08-01

*  [[Sridhar Ramesh]] has joined, editing [[module]] and [[Mitchell-Benabou language]] so far.

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: replied and reacted at  [[differential form]]

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Archived the [[2009 July changes]].  (Check there if you missed some ... which you did, I promise.)
   *  More discussion with [[Rafael Borowiecki]] at [[category theory]].
   *  Answered one of two un-logged questions by [[Jim Stasheff]] at the bottom of [[Timeline of category theory and related mathematics]].
   *  Asked Urs a question at [[differential form]].


***

[[2008 changes|First list]] — [[2009 July changes|Previous list]] — No next list — **Current list**

***


category: meta

[[!redirects 2009 August changes]]