

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Fields and quanta
+--{: .hide}
[[!include fields and quanta - table]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In the [[standard model of particle physics]] a _B-meson_ is a [[meson]] which is a [[bound state]] of a [[bottom quark]] and any other [[quark]] from the first two [[generations of fermions]] ([[up quark]] or [[down quark]] or [[strange quark]] or [[charm quark]]).

Hence the class of B-mesons goes along side that of [[K-mesons]] (light mnesons with a [[strange quark]]) and [[D-mesons]] (light meson with a [[charm quark]]).

[[!include flavors of fundamental particles -- table]]

Current [[experiments]] studying B-meson [[physics]] are the \

* [[LHCb experiment]] 

* [[Belle experiment]] 

* [[BaBar experiment]]

All these are increasingly seeing [[flavour anomalies]] (see there) in $B$-meson decays at high [[statistical significance]], pointing to physics beyond the [[standard model of particle physics]].

## Related concepts

* [[upsilon-meson]]

* [[K-meson]], [[D-meson]]

* [[pion]], [[omega meson]], [[rho meson]]

* [[XYZ meson]]

* B-meson [[experiments]]

  * [[LHCb experiment]]

  * [[Belle collaboration]]

  * [[BaBar experiment]]

* B-[[baryon]]: [[Lambda baryon]]

* observations

  * [[flavour anomaly]]

  * [[V_cb puzzle]]

  * [[pentaquark]]

## References

### General

* [[Patrick Koppenburg]], [[Zdenek Dolezal]], [[Maria Smizanska]], _Rare decays of b hadrons_, Scholarpedia, 11(6):32643 ([doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.32643](http://dx.doi.org/10.4249/scholarpedia.32643))


See also 

* Wikipedia, _<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B_meson">B meson</a>_

### Semileptonic decay


[[semileptonic decay]]:

Review:

* R. Casalbuoni, A. Deandrea, N.Di Bartolomeo, F. Feruglio, R. Gatto, G. Nardulli, _Phenomenology of Heavy Meson Chiral Lagrangians_, Phys. Rept. 281:145-238, 1997 ([arXiv:hep-ph/9605342](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9605342))


* Jochen Dingfelder, Thomas Mannel, _Leptonic and semileptonic decays of $B$ mesons_, Rev. Mod. Phys. 88 (2016) 3, 035008 ([spire:1488176](https://inspirehep.net/literature/1488176), [doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.88.035008](https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.88.035008))

See also

* J. P. Lees et al. (BABAR Collaboration), _Measurement of the $B^+ \to \omega \ell^+ \nu$ branching fraction with semileptonically tagged B mesons_, Phys. Rev. D 88, 072006 (2013) ([doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.88.072006](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.88.072006))

* Xian-Wei Kang, Tao Luo, Yi Zhang, Ling-Yun Dai, Chao Wang, _Semileptonic $B$ and $B_s$ decays involving scalar and axial-vector mesons_, Eur. Phys. J. C 78, 909 (2018) ([doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-018-6385-9](https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-018-6385-9))




[[!include Skyrme hadrodynamics with heavy mesons -- references]]


### In holographic QCD


Discussion in [[holographic light front QCD]]:

* Mohammad Ahmady, _Holographic light-front QCD in B meson phenomenology_ (<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.00266">arXiv:2001.00266</a>)

[[!redirects B mesons]]

[[!redirects B-meson]]
[[!redirects B-mesons]]
