
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### 2-Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include 2-category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Higher algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--




#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The Eilenberg--Moore (EM) category of a [[monad]] is the category of its [[algebra for a monad|modules]] (aka algebras). Dually, the EM category of a [[comonad]] is its category of comodules. 
The subcategory of its [[free functor|free]] modules is one of the descriptions of the [[Kleisli category]] of the monad. The EM and Kleisli categories have universal properties which make sense in a general 2-category. 


## Definitions

Let $(T,\eta,\mu)$ be a [[monad]] in [[Cat]], where $T \colon C\to C$ is an endofunctor with multiplication $\mu \colon T T\to T$ and unit $\eta \colon Id_C\to T$.  Recall that a (left) $T$-[[algebra for a monad|module]] (or $T$-algebra) in $C$ is a pair $(M,\nu)$ of an object $M$ in $C$ and a morphism $\nu\colon T(M)\to M$ which is a __$T$-[[action]]__, namely $\nu\circ T(\nu)=\nu\circ\mu_{M} \colon T(T(M))\to M$ and $\nu\circ\eta_M = id_M$, and that a morphism of $T$-modules $f\colon (M,\nu^M)\to (N,\nu^N)$ is a morphism $f\colon M\to N$ in $C$ that commutes with the action: $f\circ\nu^M=\nu^N\circ T(f)\colon T(M)\to N$. The composition of morphisms of $T$-modules is the composition of underlying morphisms in $C$.

$T$-modules and their morphisms thus form a [[category]] $C^T$ which is called the __Eilenberg--Moore category__ of the monad $T$.  This may also be written $Alg(T)$, $T\,Alg$, etc.  It comes equipped with a forgetful functor $U^T \colon C^T \to C$ which is the [[universal property|universal]] $T$-module, and has a [[left adjoint]] $F^T$ such that the monad $U^T F^T$ arising from the adjunction is equal to $T$.

In general, if $t \colon a \to a$ is a monad in a [[2-category]] $K$, then the __Eilenberg--Moore object__ $a^t$ of $t$ is, if it exists, the universal (left) $t$-module.  That is, there is a morphism $u^t \colon a^t \to a$ and a 2-cell $t u^t \Rightarrow u^t$ that mediate a natural isomorphism $K(x, a^t) \cong LMod(x,t)$ between morphisms $x \to a^t$ and $t$-modules $(m \colon x \to a, \lambda \colon t m \Rightarrow m)$.  Not every 2-category admits Eilenberg--Moore objects.


## Properties

### Universal properties

Apart from being the universal left $T$-module, the EM category of a monad $T$ in $Cat$ has some other interesting properties.

There is a [[full subcategory]] $RAdj(C)$ of the [[slice category]] $Cat/C$ on the functors $X \to C$ that have left adjoints.  For any monad $T$ on $C$ there is a full subcategory of this consisting of the adjoint pairs that compose to give $T$.  The functor $U^T \colon C^T \to C$ is the [[terminal object]] of this category.

If $C_T$ is the [[Kleisli category]] of $T$ and $F_T \colon C \to C_T$ the canonical functor, then the EM category $C^T$ can be constructed as the [[pullback]]
$$
\array{
  C^T & \to & [C_T^{op}, Set] \\
  \downarrow & & \downarrow \mathrlap{[F_T^{op},Set]} \\
  C & \underset{Y}{\to} & [C^{op}, Set]
}
$$
Thus a $T$-algebra may be regarded as a [[presheaf]] on the Kleisli category of $T$ whose restriction to $C$ is [[representable]].  This observation seems to be due to Linton.  Street--Walters show that it holds in any 2-category equipped with a [[Yoneda structure]].

Just as the [[Kleisli object]] of a monad $t$ in a 2-category $K$ can be defined as the [[lax colimit]] of the [[lax functor]] $\ast \to K$ [[monad|corresponding]] to $t$, the EM object of $t$ is its [[lax limit]].


### By lax 2-limits

S. Lack has shown how Eilenberg-Moore objects $C^T$ can be obtained as combinations of certain simpler lax limits, when the 2-category $K$ in question is the 2-category of 2-algebras over a 2-monad $\mathbf{G}$ and lax, colax or pseudo morphisms of such: 

* [[Steve Lack]], _Limits for lax morphisms_ , Applied Categorical Structures __13__:3 (2005) , pp. 189--203(15) 

This encompasses for example the theory of (op)monoidal monads and corresponding monoidal Eilenberg--Moore categories.

If $(T,\mu,\eta)$ is a monad in a small category $A$, and $B$ is another category, then consider the functor category $[B,A]$. There is a tautological monad $[B,T]$ on $[B,A]$ defined by $[B,T](F)(b) = T(F(b))$, $b\in Ob B$, $[B,T](F)(f) = T(F(f))$, $f\in Mor B$, $\mu^{[B,T]}_F : TTF\Rightarrow TF$, $(\mu^{[B,T]}_F)_b = \mu_{Fb}$
$(\eta^{[B,T]}_F)_b = \eta_{Fb} : Fb\to TFb$. Then there is a canonical isomorphism of EM categories

$$
[B,A^T] \cong [B,A]^{[B,T]}.
$$

Namely, write the object part of a functor $G : B\to A^T$ as $(G^A,G^\rho)$, where $G^A :B\to A$ and $G^\rho(b) : TG^A(b)\to G^A(b)$ is the $T$-action of $G^A(b)$ and the morphism part simply as $f\mapsto G(f)$. Then, $G^\rho : b\mapsto G^\rho(b) : TG^A\Rightarrow G^A$ is a natural transformation because for any morphism $f:b\to b'$, $G(f) : (G^A(b),G^\rho(b))\to (G^A(b'),G^\rho(b'))$ is by the definition of $G$, a morphism of $T$-algebras. $G^\rho$ is, by the same argument, an action $[B,T](G^A)\Rightarrow G^A$. Conversely, for any $[B,T]$-module $(G^A,G^\sigma)$ for any $b\in Ob B$, $G^\sigma(b)$ will evaluate to a $T$-action on $G^A(b)$, hence $b\mapsto (G^A(b), G^\sigma(b))$ is an object part of a functor in $[B,A^T]$ with morphism part again $f\mapsto G(g)$. The correspondence for the natural transformations, $g: (G^A,G^\sigma)\Rightarrow (H^A,H^\tau)$ is similar. 

Dually, for a comonad $\Omega$ in $B$, there is a canonical comonad $[\Omega, A]$ on $[B,A]$ and an isomorphism of categories 

$$
[B^\Omega, A] \cong [B,A]^{[\Omega,A]}
$$

### Limits and colimits in EM categories

* The Eilenberg-Moore category of a monad $T$ on a category $C$ has all [[limits]] which exist in $C$, and they are [[created limit|created]] by the forgetful functor.

* In contrast, the subject of [[colimits in categories of algebras]] is less easy, but a good deal can be said.


### Local presentability
 {#LocalPresentability}

+-- {: .num_defn #AccessibleMonad}
###### Definition

An _[[accessible monad]]_ is a [[monad]] on an [[accessible category]] whose underlying [[functor]] is an [[accessible functor]].

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The Eilenberg-Moore category of a $\kappa$-accessible monad, def. \ref{AccessibleMonad}, is a  $\kappa$-[[accessible category]]. If in addition the category on which the monad acts is a $\kappa$-[[locally presentable category]] then so is the EM-category.


=--

([Adamek-Rosicky, 2.78](#AdamekRosicky))

Moreover, let $C$ be a [[topos]]. Then

* if a [[monad]] $T : C \to C$ has a [[right adjoint]] then $T Alg(C)= C^T$ is itself a topos;

* if a [[comonad]] $T : C \to C$ is [[exact functor|left exact]], then $T CoAlg(C) = C_T$ is itself a topos.

See at _[[topos of algebras over a monad]]_ for details.


## References

* [[Ross Street]], _The formal theory of monads_, JPAA 2, 1972 
* [[Fred Linton]], _An outline of functorial semantics_, in [[LNM 80]], 1969
* [[Ross Street]], [[Bob Walters]], _Yoneda structures_, J. Algebra __50__, 1978

Local presentability of EM-categories is discussed on p. 123, 124 of

* [[Jiří Adámek]], [[Jiří Rosický]], _[[Locally presentable and accessible categories]]_, Cambridge University Press, (1994)
 {#AdamekRosicky}

The following paper of Melliès compares the Linton representability condition above with the [[Segal condition]] that distinguishes those [[simplicial sets]] that are the [[nerves]] of categories.

* [[Paul-André Melliès]], _Segal condition meets computational effects_, LICS 2010 ([pdf](http://www.pps.jussieu.fr/~mellies/papers/segal-lics-2010.pdf))

Discussion for [[(infinity,1)-monads]] realized in the context of [[quasi-categories]] is around def. 6.1.7 of

* [[Emily Riehl]], [[Dominic Verity]], _Homotopy coherent adjunctions and the formal theory of monads_ ([arXiv:1310.8279](http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.8279))
 {#RiehlVerity13}


[[!redirects Eilenberg–Moore category]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg--Moore category]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg-Moore object]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg–Moore object]]
[[!redirects Eilenberg--Moore object]]
[[!redirects Alg(T)]]
[[!redirects T-Alg]]
[[!redirects T-alg]]
[[!redirects T Alg]]
[[!redirects T alg]]