
An element $x$ in a [[ring]] (or potentially even a [[nonassociative algebra|nonassociative]] [[rig]]) $A$ is __nilpotent__ if there exist a natural number $n$ such that $x^n = 0$. 

An ring/rig/algebra is __nilpotent__ if there exists a uniform number $n$ such that any product of $n$ elements is $0$. An algebra over a [[field]] is __locally nilpotent__ if all of its finitely-generated subalgebras are nilpotent. A [[Lie algebra]] is __ad-nilpotent__ if the multiplication with any of its elements is a nilpotent linear operator. A Lie algebra $A$ is __nilpotent__ iff its [[lower central series]] $A, [A,A], [A,[A,A]], \ldots, [A,[A,[A,\ldots,[A,A]\cdots]]], \ldots$ terminates with $0$ after finitely many steps. By Engel's theorem ([English Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Engel_theorem)) a finite-dimensional Lie algebra is nilpotent iff it is locally nilpotent. Thus sometimes locally nilpotent Lie algebras are called __Engel's Lie algebras__. 

The class of locally nilpotent [[associative algebras]] is closed under extensions (defined in the category of associative algebras).  Consequently associative algebras have a largest nilpotent ideal (namely the sum of all locally nilpotent ideals), which is called __Levitskii radical__. 

The structure rings of classical [[algebraic variety|algebraic varieties]] are finitely generated [[noetherian ring|noetherian]] commutative associative unital rings _without nilpotent elements_. One of the principal advantages of Grothendieck's theory of [[schemes]] is to allow for nilpotent elements in [[local rings]]. A scheme is [[reduced scheme|reduced]] if there are no nilpotent elements in stalks of the structure sheaf.


[[!redirects nilpotent]]
[[!redirects nilpotent element]]
[[!redirects nilpotent elements]]

[[!redirects nilpotent algebra]]
[[!redirects nilpotent algebras]]
[[!redirects locally nilpotent algebra]]
[[!redirects locally nilpotent algebras]]
[[!redirects ad-nilpotent Lie algebra]]
[[!redirects ad-nilpotent Lie algebras]]
[[!redirects nilpotent Lie algebra]]
[[!redirects nilpotent Lie algebras]]
[[!redirects Engel's Lie algebra]]
[[!redirects Engel's Lie algebras]]

[[!redirects Levitskii radical]]
[[!redirects Levitskii radicals]]
