
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea and definition

Pyknotic sets (from the ancient Greek πυκνός, meaning thick, dense, or compact) aim to provide a convenient setting
in the framework of [[homotopical algebra]] for working with algebraic objects that have some sort of [[topological space|topology]] on them.

\begin{definition}
A _pyknotic set_ is a [[sheaf]] of sets on the site of [[compact]] [[Hausdorff]]
[[topological spaces]] whose underlying set has [[rank]] smaller
than the smallest [[strongly inaccessible cardinal]].
The [[Grothendieck topology]] on the latter category
is generated by finite jointly effective epimorphic families of maps.
\end{definition}

Pyknotic sets form a [[coherent topos]], whereas the closely related category of [[condensed sets]] does not form a topos ([BarHai 19, Sec. 0.3](#BarHai19)).

This construction generalizes to pyknotic objects for any [[(∞,1)-category]].

Compactly generated topological spaces embed fully faithfully into pyknotic sets, in a manner that preserves limits. 

> One key point, however, is that the relationship between compactly generated topological spaces and pyknotic sets is _dual_ to the relationship between compactly generated topological spaces and general topological spaces: in topological spaces, compactly generated topological spaces are stable under colimits but not limits; in pyknotic sets, compactly generated topological spaces are stable under limits but not colimits ([BarHai 19, 0.2.3](#BarHai19)).

The concept of pyknotic structure can be compared to that of [[motivation for cohesive toposes|cohesive structure]]:

> one of the main peculiarities of the theory of pyknotic structures ... is also one of its advantages: the forgetful functor is not faithful. ([BarHai 19, 0.2.4](#BarHai19))

The global sections functor is given by evaluation at the one-point compactum. This has a left adjoint sending a set, $X$, to the discrete pyknotic set attached to $X$, and a right adjoint to the *indiscrete* pyknotic set attached to $X$. The left adjoint, the discrete functor, does not preserve limits and so does not possess a further left adjoint. The topos of pyknotic sets is thus not [[cohesive]] ([BarHai 19, 2.2.14](#BarHai19)).

 
## Examples

For example [[locally compact topological space|locally compact]] [[abelian groups]], [[normed rings]], and [[complete metric space|complete]] [[locally convex topological vector spaces]] are pyknotic objects.

## Alternative definitions

Pyknotic sets can be described as sheaves on several different sites. 

1. Take $\mathcal{C}$ to be the Kleisli category for the ultrafilter monad: objects are sets and morphisms are functions between the sets of ultrafilters borne by those sets. Pyknotic sets are functors $\mathcal{C}^{op}\to Set$ that carry coproducts in $\mathcal{C}$ to products in $Set$. So they can be understood as models for a large [[Lawvere theory]].

1. Take $\mathcal{C}$  to be the category of compact Hausdorff spaces (i.e., compacta) but where the sheaf condition is somewhat more elaborate, requiring in addition that $F$ carries the coequalizer displaying an epimorphism $K \to L$ as the cokernel of its kernel pair to monomorphism.

1. Take $\mathcal{C} \subset Top$ to be the subcategory of tiny compact hausdorff spaces that are extremally disconnected, called [[Stonean spaces]]. A pyknotic set carries finite coproducts to products in $Set$.

## Motivation

In the first of a series of talks ([BarHaiMSRI](#BarHaiMSRI)), Barwick motivates the concept of pyknotic set as follows:

The category of [[topological abelian groups]], $AbTop$, is not [[abelian category|abelian]]. This can be seen by taking an abelian group and imposing two topologies, one finer than the other. Both the [[kernel]] and [[cokernel]] of the continuous map which is the identity on elements are $0$. This is an indication that $AbTop$ does not have enough objects. To rectify this, we can modify the category to allow 'pyknotic' structures on $0$, which can act as a cokernel here.
 
In [[Pontrjagin duality]], the pairing and double dual maps are not necessarily continuous outside of locally compact abelian groups. This occurs because the category of topological spaces does not have an [[internal hom]]. This is an indication of too many objects, and restriction to [[compactly generated spaces]] may be imposed.

## Contrast with condensed mathematics

> ...the indiscrete topological space $\{0,1\}$, viewed as a sheaf on the site of compacta, is pyknotic but not [[condensed set|condensed]] (relative to any universe). By allowing the presence of such pathological objects into the category of pyknotic sets, we guarantee that it is a topos, which is not true for the category of condensed sets. ([BarHai 19, sec 0.3](#BarHai19))

> [Barwick and Haine] assume  the  existence  of  universes,  fixing  in  particular  a  "tiny" and a "small" universe, and look at sheaves on tiny profinite sets with values in small sets; they term these pyknotic sets. In our language, placing ourselves in the small universe, this would be $\kappa$-condensed sets for the first strongly inaccessible cardinal $\kappa$ they consider (the one giving rise to the tiny universe). ([Scholze 19, p. 7]())


## Related concepts

* [[condensed set]]

* [[pro-étale site]]

* [[quasi-topological space]] (roughly, the [[concrete sheaf|concrete]] pyknotic sets)

## References

* {#BarHai19} [[Clark Barwick]], [[Peter Haine]], _Pyknotic objects, I.  Basic notions_, ([arXiv:1904.09966](https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09966))

* {#BarHaiMSRI} [[Clark Barwick]], [[Peter Haine]], _MSRI: Pyknotic/Condensed Seminar_, 
  * 1: _Who cares about pyknosis?_, ([video](https://www.msri.org/seminars/24809)); 
  * 2: _Pyknotic sets_, ([video](https://www.msri.org/seminars/24915))
  * 3: _Pyknotic abelian groups_, ([video](https://www.msri.org/seminars/24919))
  * 4: _Animating pyknotic sets (AKA pyknotic spaces)_, ([video](https://www.msri.org/seminars/24750))

* {#Scholze19} [[Peter Scholze]], _Lectures on Condensed Mathematics_, ([pdf](https://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/scholze/Condensed.pdf))

* Sebastian Wolf, _The pro-étale topos as a category of pyknotic presheaves_, [arxiv/2012.10502](https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.10502)

[[!redirects pyknotic sets]]
[[!redirects pyknotic object]]
[[!redirects pyknotic objects]]
