pages/2040.md, before:


> under construction

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

Quite generally, the term _Mackey functor_ refers to an [[additive functor]] from a ([[subcategory]] of) a [[category of correspondences]] (in a [[disjunctive category]] $\mathcal{C}$) to possibly any other [[additive category]] which however usually is the "base" abelian category. More generally the term now refers to the fairly obvious [[homotopy theory|homotopy theoretic]] or [[higher category theory|higher categorical]] refinements of this concept.

Therefore the concept of Mackey functors is similar to that of [[sheaves with transfer]] and as such appears (implicitly) in the discussion of [[motives]] (explicitly e.g. in [Kahn-Yamazaki 11, section 2](#KahnYamazaki11), where $\mathcal{C}$ is a category of suitable [[schemes]]).

The concept was however introduced and named as such in the context of [[representation theory]] ([Dress 71](#Dress71)) and [[equivariant homotopy theory]]/[[equivariant cohomology]] ([May 96](#May96)). In that context it first received its full [[(∞,1)-category]]-theoretic formulation and discussion ([Barwick 14](#Barwick14)).

## Definition

We follow the modern account in ([Barwick 14](#Barwick14)).

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[disjunctive (∞,1)-category]] and write $Corr_1(\mathcal{C})^\otimes$ for the [[(∞,1)-category of correspondences]] in $\mathcal{C}$, regarded as a [[symmetric monoidal (∞,1)-category]] with respect to its [[coproduct]] (which is a [[biproduct]] by disjunctiveness of $\mathcal{C}$).

Write $\mathcal{A} = $[[Spectra]]${}^\otimes$ for the [[(∞,1)-category of spectra]] regarded as a [[symmetric monoidal (∞,1)-category]] with respect to the [[smash product of spectra]].  More generally $\mathcal{A}$ could be any [[symmetric monoidal (∞,1)-category|symmetric monoidal]] [[stable (∞,1)-category]]

Then a (spectral) _Mackey functor_ on $\mathcal{C}$ is a [[monoidal (∞,1)-functor]] of the form


$$
  S \;\colon\; Corr_1(\mathcal{C})^\otimes \longrightarrow \mathcal{A}^{\otimes}
  \,.
$$

Notice that this means that $S$ is in particular


1. a covariant [[(∞,1)-functor]] $(-)_\ast \colon\mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{A}$;

1. a contravariant [[(∞,1)-functor]], hence  $(-)^\ast \colon\mathcal{C}^{op} \to \mathcal{A}$;

1. satisfying the [[Beck-Chevalley condition]].

(More generally one may specify suitably chosen sub-$(\infty,1)$-categories $\mathcal{C}^\dagger, \mathcal{C}_\dagger \subset \mathcal{C}$ and restrict $Corr_1$ to [[correspondences]] whose left leg is in $\mathcal{C}_\dagger$ and whose right leg is in $\mathcal{C}^\dagger$ ([Barwick 14, section 5](#Barwick14)).)

## Examples

### Dress' Mackey functors

For $\mathcal{A}$ taken to be (the [[derived category]]) of an [[abelian category]] (or better: postcomposed with a [[homological functor]] ) this definition reduces ([Barwick 14](#Barwick14)) to that of Mackey functors as originally defined in ([Dress 71](#Dress71)).


### Equivariant spectra 
 {#EquivariantSpectra}

Let $G$ be a [[finite group]]. Let $\mathcal{C}= G Set$ be its category of [[permutation representations]]. Then $Corr_1(\mathcal{C})$ is essentially what is called the [[Burnside category]] of $G$ (possibly after abelianizing/stabilizing the hom-spaces suitably, but as ([Barwick 14](#Barwick14)) highlights, this is unnecessary when one is mapping out of this into something abelian/stable, as is the case here).

For $G$ finite then Mackey functors on $\mathcal{C}$ are equivalent to  genuine [[G-spectra]] ([Guillou-May 11, theorem 0.1](#GuillouMay11), [Barwick 14, below example B.6](#Barwick14)) (Notice that this equivalence does not in general hold if $G$ is not a finite group.)



(...)
 
For $E$ a [[genuine G-spectrum]] then the corresponding spectral Mackey functor is given by the [[equivariant homotopy groups]] of $E$

$$
  G/H \mapsto E(G/H) =  [\Sigma^\infty_+ G/H, E]_G
  \,,
$$

where on the right we have the $G$-equivariant [[mapping spectrum]] from the (equivariant) [[suspension spectrum]] of the [[orbit]] $G/H$ to $E$.

(e.g. ([Guillou-May 11, remark 2.5](#GuillouMay11)), see also ([Schwede 15, p. 16](#Schwede15)) for restriction and section 4 culminating on p. 37 for transfer and compatibility).

Further, the corresponding abelian-group valued Mackey functor is

$$
  \pi_n(E) \colon G/H \mapsto [G/H_+\wedge S^n, X]_G
  \,,
$$

where now on the right we have just the [[homotopy classes]] of maps (e.g. [Greenlees-May 95, p. 43](#GreenleesMay95))


(...)

## Cohomology with coefficients in a Mackey functor
 {#Cohomology}

We discuss [[cohomology]] of [[topological G-spaces]] with [[coefficients]]
in a Mackey functor, following notation and conventions as in ([May 96, sections IX, X](#May96)). See also ([Greenlees-May 95, p. 9](#GreenleesMay95)).


+-- {: .num_defn #CohomologyOfGSpace}
###### Defininition

For $X$ a [[pointed object|pointed]] [[G-CW complex]], define the [[chain complex]] $C_\bullet(X)$ of Mackey functors to be given by the stable [[equivariant homotopy groups]] of the quotient spaces $X^{\bullet}/X^{\bullet-1}$:

$$
  C_n(X) \coloneqq \pi_n(X^n/X^{n-1})
  \,,
$$

Then for $A$ any Mackey functor, the ordinary cohomology of $X$ with [[coefficients]] in $A$ is the [[cochain cohomology]] of the complex of homs of Mackey functors $C_n(X) \to A$:

$$
  H_G^n(X,A) \coloneqq H^n( Hom(C_\bullet(X), A) )
  \,.
$$

More generally, for $V$ a G-[[representation]], the $(n-V)$-[[RO(G)-grading|RO(G)-graded]] cohomology of $X$ with coefficients in $A$ is

$$
  H_G^{n-V}(X,A) = H_G^n(S^V \wedge X, X)
  \,.
$$
 
=--

([May 96, section X.4 def. 4.1, def. 4.2 ](#May96))

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The corresponding [[reduced cohomology]] $\tilde H^n(-,A)$ is represented by maps into the [[Eilenberg-MacLane space|Eilenberg-MacLane G-space]]:

$$
  \tilde H^n(X,A) \simeq [X,K(A,n)]_G
  \,.
$$

=--

([Greenlees-May 95](#GreenleesMay95))


+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

For this kind of cohomology, there is equivariant [[Serre spectral sequence]] ([Kronholm 10](#Kronholm10)).

=--

## Related concepts

* [[Tambara functor]]

## References

The original article is

* {#Dress71} A. W. M. Dress, _Notes on the theory of representations of finite groups. Part I: The Burnside ring of a finite group and some AGN-applications, Bielefeld_, 1971, 

Reviews and surveys include

* {#GreenleesMay95} [[John Greenlees]], [[Peter May]], _Equivariant stable homotopy theory_, in I.M. James (ed.), _Handbook of Algebraic Topology_ , pp. 279-325. 1995. ([pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/PAPERS/Newthird.pdf))

* {#May96} [[Peter May]], section IX.4 of _Equivariant homotopy and cohomology theory_ CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics, vol. 91, Published for the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, Washington, DC, 1996. With contributions by M. Cole, G. Comeza˜na, S. Costenoble, A. D. Elmenddorf, J. P. C. Greenlees, L. G. Lewis, Jr., R. J. Piacenza, G. Triantafillou, and S. Waner. ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/u/faculty/doug/otherpapers/alaska1.pdf))



*  Peter Webb, _A Guide to Mackey Functors_ ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/people/faculty/doug/otherpapers/WebbMF.pdf))


* [[Michael Hill]], [[Michael Hopkins]], [[Douglas Ravenel]], section 4 of _The Arf-Kervaire problem in algebraic topology: Sketch of the proof_ ([[HHRKervaire.pdf:file]])

  (with an eye towards application to the [[Arf-Kervaire invariant problem]])

* [[Megan Shulman]], chapter 2 of _Equivariant local coefficients and the $RO(G)$-graded cohomology of classifying spaces_ ([arXiv:1405.1770](http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.1770))

See also

* [[Tammo tom Dieck]], _Transformation groups_, Studies in Mathematics, vol. 8, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, New York, 1987, x + 311 pp., 

* Serge Bouc, chapter 1 of _Green Functors and G-sets_, LNM 1671 (1997; paperback 2008) [doi:10.1007/BFb0095821](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0095821)

* [[Tammo tom Dieck]], Equivariant homology and Mackey functors, Mathematische Annalen __206__, no.1, pp. 67--78, 1973 [doi:10.1007/BF01431529](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01431529)

* {#GreenleesMay95} [[John Greenlees]], [[Peter May]], appendix A of _Generalized Tate cohomology_, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 113 (1995) no 543 ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/people/faculty/doug/otherpapers/GM-Tate-543.pdf))


* D. Tambara, The Drinfeld center of the category of Mackey functors, J. Algebra __319__, 10, pp. 4018-4101 (2008) [doi:10.1016/j.jalgebra.2008.02.011](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jalgebra.2008.02.011)

* Elango Panchadcharam, _Categories of Mackey Functors_, PhD thesis, Macquarie Univ. 2006

* {#Kronholm10} [[William Kronholm]], _The $RO(G)$-graded Serre spectral sequence_, Homology Homotopy Appl. Volume 12, Number 1 (2010), 75-92. ([pdf](http://www.swarthmore.edu/NatSci/wkronho1/serre.pdf), [Euclid](https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.hha/1296223823))


The construction of [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]] in terms of [[Mackey functors]] is due to 

* {#GuillouMay11} [[Bert Guillou]], [[Peter May]],  _Models of $G$-spectra as presheaves of spectra, ([arXiv:1110.3571](http://arxiv.org/abs/1110.3571))

  _Permutative $G$-categories in equivariant infinite loop space theory ([arXiv:1207.3459](http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3459))

* {#Barwick14} [[Clark Barwick]], _Spectral Mackey functors and equivariant algebraic K-theory (I)_ ([arXiv:1404.0108](http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.0108))

* {#Barwick15} [[Clark Barwick]], _Spectral Mackey functors and equivariant algebraic K-theory (II)_ ([arXiv:1505.03098](http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.03098))

* {#BohmannOsorno14} [[Anna Marie Bohmann]], [[Angélica Osorno]], _Constructing equivariant spectra via categorical Mackey functors_ ([arXiv:1405.6126](http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.6126))

Lectures notes include

* {#Schwede15} [[Stefan Schwede]], around p. 16 of _[[Lectures on Equivariant Stable Homotopy Theory]]_, 2015 ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/schwede/equivariant.pdf))

Application of Mackey functors to the theory of [[motives]] includes

* {#KahnYamazaki11} [[Bruno Kahn]], Takao Yamazaki, _Voevodsky's motives and Weil reciprocity_, Duke Mathematical Journal 162, 14 (2013) 2751-2796 ([arXiv:1108.2764](http://arxiv.org/abs/1108.2764))

[[!redirects Mackey functors]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 104415 Revision date: 2016-01-16 06:33:02 Page name: Mackey functor Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 89.204.139.15

pages/2040.md, after:


> under construction

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

Quite generally, the term _Mackey functor_ refers to an [[additive functor]] from a ([[subcategory]] of) a [[category of correspondences]] (in a [[disjunctive category]] $\mathcal{C}$) to possibly any other [[additive category]] which however usually is the "base" abelian category. More generally the term now refers to the fairly obvious [[homotopy theory|homotopy theoretic]] or [[higher category theory|higher categorical]] refinements of this concept.

Therefore the concept of Mackey functors is similar to that of [[sheaves with transfer]] and as such appears (implicitly) in the discussion of [[motives]] (explicitly e.g. in [Kahn-Yamazaki 11, section 2](#KahnYamazaki11), where $\mathcal{C}$ is a category of suitable [[schemes]]).

The concept was however introduced and named as such in the context of [[representation theory]] ([Dress 71](#Dress71)) and [[equivariant homotopy theory]]/[[equivariant cohomology]] ([May 96](#May96)). Here the [[equivariant homotopy groups]] $\pi_n(E)$ of a (genuine) [[G-spectrum]] $E$ organize into a Mackey functor on $G$-orbits, and this plays a key role in the [[equivariant Whitehead theorem]].  In this context of [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]] Mackey functors were given a full [[(∞,1)-category]]-theoretic formulation in ([Barwick 14](#Barwick14)).

## Definition

We follow the modern account in ([Barwick 14](#Barwick14)).

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[disjunctive (∞,1)-category]] and write $Corr_1(\mathcal{C})^\otimes$ for the [[(∞,1)-category of correspondences]] in $\mathcal{C}$, regarded as a [[symmetric monoidal (∞,1)-category]] with respect to its [[coproduct]] (which is a [[biproduct]] by disjunctiveness of $\mathcal{C}$).

Write $\mathcal{A} = $[[Spectra]]${}^\otimes$ for the [[(∞,1)-category of spectra]] regarded as a [[symmetric monoidal (∞,1)-category]] with respect to [[direct sum]].  More generally $\mathcal{A}$ could be any [[symmetric monoidal (∞,1)-category|symmetric monoidal]] [[stable (∞,1)-category]]

Then a (spectral) _Mackey functor_ on $\mathcal{C}$ is a [[monoidal (∞,1)-functor]] of the form


$$
  S \;\colon\; Corr_1(\mathcal{C})^\otimes \longrightarrow \mathcal{A}^{\oplus}
  \,.
$$

Notice that this means that $S$ is in particular


1. a covariant [[(∞,1)-functor]] $(-)_\ast \colon\mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{A}$;

1. a contravariant [[(∞,1)-functor]], hence  $(-)^\ast \colon\mathcal{C}^{op} \to \mathcal{A}$;

1. satisfying the [[Beck-Chevalley condition]].

(More generally one may specify suitably chosen sub-$(\infty,1)$-categories $\mathcal{C}^\dagger, \mathcal{C}_\dagger \subset \mathcal{C}$ and restrict $Corr_1$ to [[correspondences]] whose left leg is in $\mathcal{C}_\dagger$ and whose right leg is in $\mathcal{C}^\dagger$ ([Barwick 14, section 5](#Barwick14)).)


## Examples

### Dress' Mackey functors

For $\mathcal{A}$ taken to be (the [[derived category]]) of an [[abelian category]] (or better: postcomposed with a [[homological functor]] ) this definition reduces ([Barwick 14](#Barwick14)) to that of Mackey functors as originally defined in ([Dress 71](#Dress71)).


### Equivariant spectra 
 {#EquivariantSpectra}

Let $G$ be a [[finite group]]. Let $\mathcal{C}= G Set$ be its category of [[permutation representations]]. Then $Corr_1(\mathcal{C})$ is essentially what is called the [[Burnside category]] of $G$ (possibly after abelianizing/stabilizing the hom-spaces suitably, but as ([Barwick 14](#Barwick14)) highlights, this is unnecessary when one is mapping out of this into something abelian/stable, as is the case here).

For $G$ finite then Mackey functors on $\mathcal{C}$ are equivalent to  genuine [[G-spectra]] ([Guillou-May 11, theorem 0.1](#GuillouMay11), [Barwick 14, below example B.6](#Barwick14)) (Notice that this equivalence does not in general hold if $G$ is not a finite group.)



(...)
 
For $E$ a [[genuine G-spectrum]] then the corresponding spectral Mackey functor is given by the [[equivariant homotopy groups]] of $E$

$$
  G/H \mapsto E(G/H) =  [\Sigma^\infty_+ G/H, E]_G
  \,,
$$

where on the right we have the $G$-equivariant [[mapping spectrum]] from the (equivariant) [[suspension spectrum]] of the [[orbit]] $G/H$ to $E$.

(e.g. ([Guillou-May 11, remark 2.5](#GuillouMay11)), see also ([Schwede 15, p. 16](#Schwede15)) for restriction and section 4 culminating on p. 37 for transfer and compatibility).

Further, the corresponding abelian-group valued Mackey functor is

$$
  \pi_n(E) \colon G/H \mapsto [G/H_+\wedge S^n, X]_G
  \,,
$$

where now on the right we have just the [[homotopy classes]] of maps, i.e. the morphisms in the [[equivariant stable homotopy category]] (e.g. [Greenlees-May 95, p. 43](#GreenleesMay95))


(...)

## Cohomology with coefficients in a Mackey functor
 {#Cohomology}

We discuss [[cohomology]] of [[topological G-spaces]] with [[coefficients]]
in a Mackey functor, following notation and conventions as in ([May 96, sections IX, X](#May96)). See also ([Greenlees-May 95, p. 9](#GreenleesMay95)).


+-- {: .num_defn #CohomologyOfGSpace}
###### Defininition

For $X$ a [[pointed object|pointed]] [[G-CW complex]], define the [[chain complex]] $C_\bullet(X)$ of Mackey functors to be given by the stable [[equivariant homotopy groups]] of the quotient spaces $X^{\bullet}/X^{\bullet-1}$:

$$
  C_n(X) \coloneqq \pi_n(X^n/X^{n-1})
  \,,
$$

Then for $A$ any Mackey functor, the ordinary cohomology of $X$ with [[coefficients]] in $A$ is the [[cochain cohomology]] of the complex of homs of Mackey functors $C_n(X) \to A$:

$$
  H_G^n(X,A) \coloneqq H^n( Hom(C_\bullet(X), A) )
  \,.
$$

More generally, for $V$ a G-[[representation]], the $(n-V)$-[[RO(G)-grading|RO(G)-graded]] cohomology of $X$ with coefficients in $A$ is

$$
  H_G^{n-V}(X,A) = H_G^n(S^V \wedge X, X)
  \,.
$$
 
=--

([May 96, section X.4 def. 4.1, def. 4.2 ](#May96))

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The corresponding [[reduced cohomology]] $\tilde H^n(-,A)$ is represented by maps into the [[Eilenberg-MacLane space|Eilenberg-MacLane G-space]]:

$$
  \tilde H^n(X,A) \simeq [X,K(A,n)]_G
  \,.
$$

=--

([Greenlees-May 95](#GreenleesMay95))


+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

For this kind of cohomology, there is equivariant [[Serre spectral sequence]] ([Kronholm 10](#Kronholm10)).

=--

## Related concepts

* [[Tambara functor]]

## References

The original article is

* {#Dress71} A. W. M. Dress, _Notes on the theory of representations of finite groups. Part I: The Burnside ring of a finite group and some AGN-applications, Bielefeld_, 1971, 

Reviews and surveys include

* {#GreenleesMay95} [[John Greenlees]], [[Peter May]], _Equivariant stable homotopy theory_, in I.M. James (ed.), _Handbook of Algebraic Topology_ , pp. 279-325. 1995. ([pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/PAPERS/Newthird.pdf))

* {#May96} [[Peter May]], section IX.4 of _Equivariant homotopy and cohomology theory_ CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics, vol. 91, Published for the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, Washington, DC, 1996. With contributions by M. Cole, G. Comeza˜na, S. Costenoble, A. D. Elmenddorf, J. P. C. Greenlees, L. G. Lewis, Jr., R. J. Piacenza, G. Triantafillou, and S. Waner. ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/u/faculty/doug/otherpapers/alaska1.pdf))



*  Peter Webb, _A Guide to Mackey Functors_ ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/people/faculty/doug/otherpapers/WebbMF.pdf))


* [[Michael Hill]], [[Michael Hopkins]], [[Douglas Ravenel]], section 4 of _The Arf-Kervaire problem in algebraic topology: Sketch of the proof_ ([[HHRKervaire.pdf:file]])

  (with an eye towards application to the [[Arf-Kervaire invariant problem]])

* [[Megan Shulman]], chapter 2 of _Equivariant local coefficients and the $RO(G)$-graded cohomology of classifying spaces_ ([arXiv:1405.1770](http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.1770))

See also

* [[Tammo tom Dieck]], _Transformation groups_, Studies in Mathematics, vol. 8, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, New York, 1987, x + 311 pp., 

* Serge Bouc, chapter 1 of _Green Functors and G-sets_, LNM 1671 (1997; paperback 2008) [doi:10.1007/BFb0095821](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0095821)

* [[Tammo tom Dieck]], Equivariant homology and Mackey functors, Mathematische Annalen __206__, no.1, pp. 67--78, 1973 [doi:10.1007/BF01431529](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01431529)

* {#GreenleesMay95} [[John Greenlees]], [[Peter May]], appendix A of _Generalized Tate cohomology_, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 113 (1995) no 543 ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/people/faculty/doug/otherpapers/GM-Tate-543.pdf))


* D. Tambara, The Drinfeld center of the category of Mackey functors, J. Algebra __319__, 10, pp. 4018-4101 (2008) [doi:10.1016/j.jalgebra.2008.02.011](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jalgebra.2008.02.011)

* Elango Panchadcharam, _Categories of Mackey Functors_, PhD thesis, Macquarie Univ. 2006

* {#Kronholm10} [[William Kronholm]], _The $RO(G)$-graded Serre spectral sequence_, Homology Homotopy Appl. Volume 12, Number 1 (2010), 75-92. ([pdf](http://www.swarthmore.edu/NatSci/wkronho1/serre.pdf), [Euclid](https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.hha/1296223823))


The construction of [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]] in terms of [[Mackey functors]] is due to 

* {#GuillouMay11} [[Bert Guillou]], [[Peter May]],  _Models of $G$-spectra as presheaves of spectra, ([arXiv:1110.3571](http://arxiv.org/abs/1110.3571))

  _Permutative $G$-categories in equivariant infinite loop space theory ([arXiv:1207.3459](http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3459))

* {#Barwick14} [[Clark Barwick]], _Spectral Mackey functors and equivariant algebraic K-theory (I)_ ([arXiv:1404.0108](http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.0108))

* {#Barwick15} [[Clark Barwick]], _Spectral Mackey functors and equivariant algebraic K-theory (II)_ ([arXiv:1505.03098](http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.03098))

* {#BohmannOsorno14} [[Anna Marie Bohmann]], [[Angélica Osorno]], _Constructing equivariant spectra via categorical Mackey functors_ ([arXiv:1405.6126](http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.6126))

Lectures notes include

* {#Schwede15} [[Stefan Schwede]], around p. 16 of _[[Lectures on Equivariant Stable Homotopy Theory]]_, 2015 ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/schwede/equivariant.pdf))

Application of Mackey functors to the theory of [[motives]] includes

* {#KahnYamazaki11} [[Bruno Kahn]], Takao Yamazaki, _Voevodsky's motives and Weil reciprocity_, Duke Mathematical Journal 162, 14 (2013) 2751-2796 ([arXiv:1108.2764](http://arxiv.org/abs/1108.2764))

[[!redirects Mackey functors]]
