_Stone Spaces_ (1982) is a monograph by [[Peter Johnstone]] (later author of the [[Elephant]]).  Ostensibly about the [[Stone representation theorem]], it may be best known as a reference for using [[locales]] in place of [[topological spaces]].

Although it is a work of [[mathematics]] rather than [[foundations|metamathematics]], it shows clearly by example how (usually) results about locales do not require the [[axiom of choice]] even when analogous results about topological spaces do.  [[Paul Taylor]] has somewhat jocularly written
>In &#x5B;Joh82&#x5D; the public theorems about topology are marked with an asterisk, although the official meaning of that symbol is a dependence on the axiom of choice.
([ASD I](http://www.monad.me.uk/ASD/dedras/), page 3).  Unfortunately for [[constructive mathematics|constructive mathematicians]], [[excluded middle]] is *not* considered a form of choice.


## Contents

Besides the usual prefaces, bibliography, and indexes, there is a historical introduction, and each chapter concludes with notes on historical and metamathematical aspects.  Otherwise, each of 7 chapters is divided into 4 sections, which in turn contain paragraphs that deal with essentially one idea each:

1.  Preliminaries

    1.  Lattices
        1.   [[poset]]
        2.   [[join]]
        3.   [[semilattice]]
        4.   [[meet]], [[lattice]]
        5.   [[distributive lattice]]
        6.   [[complement]], [[Boolean algebra]]
        7.   examples
        8.   [[symmetric difference]]
        9.   [[Boolean ring]]
        10.  [[Heyting algebra]]
        11.  [[pseudocomplement]]
        12.  examples
        13.  [[regular element]]
    2.  Ideals and filters
        1.  [[lower set]], [[ideal]], [[principal ideal]]
        2.  [[filter]], [[prime ideal]], [[prime filter]]
        3.  \* [[maximal ideal theorem]]
        4.  [[maximal ideal]], maximal ideals in distributive lattices
        5.  \* discrete Stone representation theorem
        6.  prime ideals in Boolean algebras
    3.  Some categorical concepts
        1.  [[object]], [[morphism]], [[category]], [[functor]], [[natural transformation]]
        2.  [[concrete category]], [[locally small category]]
        3.  posets as categories
        4.  [[adjoint functors]], [[reflective subcategory]], [[full functor]], [[faithful functor]]
        5.  [[small category]], [[limit]], [[colimit]], [[monomorphism]], [[regular monomorphism]], [[complete category]], [[finitely complete category]]
        6.  [[monad]], [[algebra for a monad]], [[monadic adjunction]]
        7.  [[variety of algebras]]
        8.  [[algebraic category]]
        9.  [[filtered category]], [[filtered colimit]], [[finitary functor]]
    4.  Free lattices
        1.   [[directed poset]], [[directed join]]
        2.   [[adjoint functor theorem]] for posets
        3.   [[suplattice]], [[complete lattice]]
        4.   [[free semilattice]]
        5.   [[free suplattice]]
        6.   [[free lattice]]
        7.   [[free complete lattice]]
        8.   [[free distributive lattice]]
        9.   [[free Boolean algebra]]
        10.  [[free complete Boolean algebra]]
        11.  [[free Heyting algebra]]

2.  Introduction to locales

    1.  Frames and locales
        1.   [[infinitely distributive lattice]], [[frame]], [[locale]]
        2.   $Frm$ is algebraic
        3.   [[point of a locale]], [[completely prime filter]]
        4.   adjunction between $Loc$ and $Top$
        5.   [[spatial locale]]
        6.   [[irreducible closed subset]], [[sober space]]
        7.   [[soberification]]
        8.   [[specialization order]], [[Alexandrov topology]], [[upper interval topology]]
        9.   [[Scott topology]]
        10.  characterisation of Scott-continuity
        11.  enrichment of $Loc$ over $Pos$
    2.  Sublocales and sites
        1.   [[sublocale]]
        2.   [[nucleus]]
        3.   nuclei classify sublocales
        4.   [[closed sublocale]], [[open sublocale]], [[dense sublocale]]
        5.   the locale of sublocales
        6.   representation of frames in Boolean algebras
        7.   continuing ...
        8.   until ...
        9.   we get ...
        10.  $Loc$ is not well-powered
        11.  $0$-[[0-site|site]], $0$-[[0-sheaf|sheaf]]
        12.  [[product of locales]]
        13.  product in $Loc$ vs $Top$
        14.  counterexample
    3.  Coherent locales
        1.  [[compact element]] of a lattice
        2.  [[coherent locale]]
        3.  localic Stone representation theorem for distributive lattices
        4.  \* [[coherent space]], [[prime spectrum]], Stone representation theorem for distributive lattices
        5.  \* [[maximal spectrum]]
        6.  [[normal lattice]]
        7.  \* results on normal lattices
    4.  Stone spaces
        1.  [[totally disconnected space]], [[totally separated space]], [[zero-dimensional space]]
        2.  [[Stone space]]
        3.  counterexamples
        4.  \* Stone representation theorem for Boolean algebras
        5.  \* [[patch topology]]
        6.  leads to ...
        7.  [[ordeered Stone space]]
        8.  \* $Ord Sto \cong Coh Top$
        9.  characterisation of Boolean algebras

3.  [[compactum|Compact Hausdorff spaces]]

    1.  Compact regular locales
        1.   [[compact locale]], [[regular locale]]
        2.   results on compact and regular locales
        3.   [[strongly Hausdorff locale]]
        4.   counterexample
        5.   [[totally unordered locale]]
        6.   products of regular locales
        7.   localic [[Tychonoff theorem]]
        8.   localic Stone–Čech compactification through the adjoint functor theorem
        9.   \* an unoccupied compact locale is empty
        10.  \* a compact regular locale is spatial, $Comp Reg Loc \cong Comp Haus Top$
        11.  [[flat sublocale]], a compact regular locale is a retract of a coherent locale
    2.  Manes\' Theorem
        1.  \* [[ultrafilter]], Stone–Čech compactification of a discrete space
        2.  \* [[Hausdorff convergence]] through ultrafilters, [[compact convergence]] through ultrafilters
        3.  \* continuity through ultrafilters
        4.  \* $Comp Haus Top$ is algebraic
        5.  \* $Comp Haus Top A$ is algebraic when $A$ is
    3.  Gleason\'s Theorem
        1.   [[projective object]]
        2.   characterisation of regular projective objects in algebraic categories
        3.   epimorphims in $Comp Haus Top$ are regular
        4.   \* characterisation of projective objects in $Comp Haus Top$
        5.   \* then ...
        6.   \* the ...
        7.   \* converse
        8.   \* [[proper map]]
        9.   \* characterisation of injective objects in $Bool Alg$ and $Dist Latt$
        10.  \* prelude to ...
        11.  \* [[Mac Neille completion]]
    4.  Vietoris locales
        1.  prelude to ...
        2.  [[Vietoris space]]
        3.  [[Vietoris locale]]
        4.  compactness of a Vietoris locale
        5.  naturality
        6.  \* Vietoris locale and space agree
        7.  more ...
        8.  results ...

4.  Continuous real-valued functions
    1.  Complete regularity and Urysohn\'s Lemma
    2.  The [[Stone–Čech compactification]]
    3.  $C(X)$ and $C^*(X)$
    4.  Gelfand duality
5.  Representations of rings
    1.  A crash course in sheaf theory
    2.  The Pierce spectrum
    3.  The Zariski spectrum
    4.  Ordered rings and real rings
6.  Profiniteness and duality
    1.  Ind-objects and pro-objects
    2.  Profinite sets and algebras
    3.  Stone-type dualities
    4.  General concrete dualities
7.  Continuous lattices
    1.  Compact topological (semi)lattices
    2.  Continuous posets and lattices
    3.  Lawson semilattices
    4.  Locally compact locales


category: reference
