
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

A **Stonean locale** is an [[extremally disconnected]] [[Stone locale]].
The category of Stonean locales has [[open maps]] of locales
as morphisms.

Thus, the category of Stonean locales is a (nonfull)
[[subcategory]] of the category of [[Stone locales]].

## Properties

In presence of the [[axiom of choice]],
every [[Stonean locale]] is spatial and the category of Stonean
locales is equivalent to the cateogry of [[Stonean spaces]].

As a variant of [[Stone duality]], the [[category]] of Stonean locales is contravariantly [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] to the category
of [[complete Boolean algebras]] and continuous homomorphisms.
One can also reformulate this statement as an equivalence
between the categories of Stonean locales and [[Boolean locales]].

Unlike the corresponding statement for [[Stonean spaces]], this version is fully constructive and is valid in any [[W-topos]].

In fact, the traditional [[Stone duality|Stonean duality]] is an immediate consequence of the localic Stonean duality and the spatiality of Stonean locales.


## Related concepts

* [[Stone locale]]
* [[Stonean space]]

## References

The definition is due to [[Marshall Stone]], see

* Marshall H. Stone,
_Algebraic characterizations of special Boolean rings_.
Fundamenta Mathematicae 29:1 (1937), 223–303.

Further investigations of Stonean and [[hyperstonean]] spaces were done by Dixmier:

* Jacques Dixmier,
_Sur certains espaces considérés par M. H.Stone_.
Summa Brasiliensis Mathematicae 2 (1951), 151–182.
[PDF](https://dmitripavlov.org/scans/dixmier.pdf).

An expository account is available in Takesaki's book

* Masamichi Takesaki,
_Theory of operator algebras I_.
Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences 124 (2002).

[[!redirects Stonean locales]]
