+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include mathematicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

This entry provides a hyperlinked index for the book

* [[Jorge Picado]], [[Aleš Pultr]],
 
  _Frames and Locales.  Topology without points_, 
  
  Frontiers in Mathematics, Birkhäuser (2012)

on basics of [[locales]] and [[pointfree topology]].

# Contents
* table of contents
{:toc}

The following lists chapterwise linked lists of keywords to relevant and related existing entries, as far as they already exist. 

I. Spaces and [[lattice|Lattices]] of Open Sets

 1. [[Sober spaces]]
 2. The axiom $T_D$: another case of spaces easy to reconstruct
 3. Summing up
 4. Aside: several technical properties of $T_D$-spaces

II. [[Frames]] and [[Locales]]. Spectra

 1. [[Frames]]
 2. [[Locales]] and [[localic maps]]
 3. Points
 4. Spectra
 5. The unit σ and [[spatiality]]
 6. The unit λ and [[sobriety]]

III. [[Sublocales]]

 1. [[Extremal monomorphisms]] in [[Loc]]
 2. [[Sublocales]]
 3. The co-frame of [[sublocales]]
 4. Images and preimages
 5. Alternative representations of [[sublocales]]
 6. Open and [[closed sublocales]]
 7. Open and [[closed localic maps]]
 8. [[Closure]]
 9. Preimage as a homomorphism
 10. Other special sublocales: one-point sublocales, and [[Boolean locale|Boolean]] ones
 11. [[Sublocales]] as quotients. Factorizing frames is surprisingly easy

IV. Structure of [[Localic Morphisms]]. The Categories [[Loc]] and [[Frm]]

 1. Special morphisms. Factorizing in Loc and Frm
 2. The down-set functor and free constructions
 3. [[Limits]] and a [[colimit]] in [[Frm]]
 4. [[Coproducts]] of [[frames]]
 5. More on the structure of [[coproduct]]
 6. [[Epimorphisms]] in [[Frm]]

V. [[Separation Axioms]]

 1. Instead of $T_1$: [[subfit]] and [[fit]]
 2. Mimicking the [[Hausdorff axiom]]
 3. I-Hausdorff frames and [[regular monomorphisms]]
 4. Aside: Raney identity
 5. Quite like the classical case: [[Regular]], [[completely regular]] and [[normal]]
 6. The categories [[RegLoc]], [[CRegLoc]], [[HausLoc]] and [[FitLoc]]

VI. More on [[Sublocales]]

 1. Subspaces and [[sublocales]] of spaces
 2. Spatial and induced [[sublocales]]
 3. [[Complemented sublocales]] of spaces are spatial
 4. The [[zero-dimensionality]] of $Sl(L)^op$ and a few consequences
 5. Diﬀerence and pseudodifference, residua
 6. [[Isbell’s Development Theorem]]
 7. Locales with no non-spatial sublocales
 8. Spaces with no non-induced sublocales

VII. [[Compactness]] and [[Local Compactness]]

 1. Basics, and a technical lemma
 2. [[Compactness]] and [[separation]]
 3. Kuratowski-Mrówka characterization
 4. Compactification
 5. [[Well below]] and [[rather below]]. Continuous completely regular frames
 6. Continuous is the same as [[locally compact]].  [[Hofmann-Lawson duality]]
 7. One more spatiality theorem
 8. [[Supercompactness]]. Algebraic, superalgebraic and [[supercontinuous frames]]

VIII. (Symmetric) Uniformity and Nearness

 1. Background
 2. [[Uniformity]] and [[nearness]] in the point-free context
 3. Uniform homomorphisms. Modelling embeddings. Products
 4. Aside: admitting nearness in a weaker sense
 5. Compact uniform and nearness frames. Finite covers
 6. [[Completeness]] and [[completion]]
 7. Functoriality. [[CUniFrm]] is coreﬂective in [[UniFrm]]
 8. An easy completeness criterion

IX. [[Paracompactness]]

 1. [[Full normality]]
 2. [[Paracompactness]], and its various guises
 3. An elegant, specifically point-free, characterization of [[paracompactness]]
 4. A pleasant surprise: paracompact (co)reflection

X. More about Completion

 1. A variant of the [[completion of uniform frames]]
 2. Two applications
 3. Cauchy points and the resulting space
 4. [[Cauchy spectrum]]
 5. [[Cauchy completion]]. The case of countably generated uniformities
 6. Generalized Cauchy points

XI. [[Metric Frames]]

 1. Diameters and metric diameters
 2. Metric spectrum
 3. [[Uniform Metrization Theorem]]
 4. [[Metrization theorems]] for plain frames
 5. Categories of [[metric frames]]

XII. [[Entourages]]. [[Asymmetric Uniformity]]

 1. [[Entourages]]
 2. [[Uniformities]] via [[entourages]]
 3. [[Entourages]] versus [[covers]]
 4. [[Asymmetric uniformity]]: the classical case
 5. [[Biframes]]
 6. [[Quasi-uniformity]] in the point-free context via [[paircovers]]
 7. The adjunction $QUnif \leftrightarrows QUniFrm$
 8. [[Quasi-uniformity]] in the point-free context via [[entourages]]

XIII. [[Connectedness]]

 1. A few observations about sublocales
 2. [[Connected]] and disconnected locales
 3. [[Locally connected]] locales
 4. A weird example
 5. A few notes

XIV. Frame of Reals and Real Functions

 1. The frame $L(R)$ of [[reals]]
 2. Properties of $L(R)$
 3. $L(R)$ versus the usual space of reals
 4. The metric uniformity of $L(R)$
 5. Continuous real functions
 6. [[Cozero]] elements
 7. More general real functions
 8. Notes

XV. [[Localic Groups]]

 1. Basics
 2. The category of [[localic groups]]
 3. [[Closed Subgroup Theorem]]
 4. The multiplication μ is open. The semigroup of open parts
 5. Uniformities
 6. Notes

Appendix I. [[Posets]]

 1. Basics
 2. [[Zorn’s Lemma]]
 3. [[Suprema]] and [[infima]]
 4. [[Semilattices]], [[lattices]] and [[complete lattices]]. Completion
 5. [[Galois connections]] (adjunctions)
 6. (Semi)lattices as algebras. [[Distributive lattices]]
 7. [[Pseudocomplements]] and [[complements]].  [[Heyting]] and [[Boolean algebras]]

Appendix II. Categories

 1. [[Categories]]
 2. [[Functors]] and [[natural transformations]]
 3. Some basic constructions
 4. More special morphisms. Factorization
 5. [[Limits]] and [[colimits]]
 6. [[Adjunction]]
 7. [[Adjointness]] and (co)limits
 8. Reflective and [[coreflective subcategories]]
 9. [[Monads]]
 10. Algebras in a category

category: reference
