
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Foundations
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

There is a lot of interesting stuff to be said about _equality_ in [[logic]], [[higher category theory]], and the [[foundations]] of mathematics, but it hasn\'t been said here yet.

## Different kinds of equality
 {#DifferentKinds}

### In type theory

In a formal language such as [[type theory]], one distinguishes various different notions of _equality_ or _equivalence_ of the terms of the language. The most basic one is _definitional equality_ or _intensional equality_.

According to [PML (1980), p. 31](#PML):

> Definitional equality is intensional equality, or equality of meaning (synonymy). [...] It is a relation between linguistic expressions [...] Definitional equality is the equivalence relation generated by abbreviatory definitions, changes of [[bound variables]] and the [[principle of substituting equals for equals]]. [...] Definitional equality can be used to rewrite expressions [...].

on p. 60:

> ... intensional (sameness of meaning) ...

For instance the symbols "$2$" and "$s(s(0))$" (successor of the succesor of 0) are definitionally/extensionally equal terms (of type the [[natural numbers]]): the first is an abbreviation for the second.

But the symbols "$2 + 2$" and "$4$" are not definitionally/intensionally equal, not equal _by definition_. They are (only) _extensionally_ equal. An actual computation/manipulation is necessary to bring them into a form that makes them intensionally equal: it is not a definition but a little lemma that $2 + 2 = 4$.

In type theory, this extensional equality is a [[judgement]] (an assertion of truth in the meta-language), not itself yet a [[proposition]] (an item in the formal system itself). One says that _propositional equality_ of two terms is what is exhibited by their [[identity type]]/[[proposition]]. For instance $Id_{\mathbb{N}}(2+2,4)$ is the [[propositions as types|type/proposition]] that $2+2$ is propositionally equal to $4$. Exhibiting a term of this type is exhibiting a propositonal identity between the two.


### Elsewhere

Here is a list of distinctions between different notions of _equality_ , in different contexts, where possibly all the following pairs of notions are, in turn, "the same", just expressed in terms of different terminologies:

*  the difference between axiomatic and defined equality;
*  the difference between identity and equality,
*  the difference between intensional and extensional equality,
*  the difference between equality and [[isomorphism]],
*  the difference between equality and [[equivalence]],
*  the possibility of operations that might not preserve equality.




## In sets

Here is an important practical fact: every [[set]] $S$ has an __equality relation__, a binary [[relation]] according to which two elements $x$ and $y$ of $S$ are related if and only if they are equal; in this case we write $x = y$.  This is the smallest [[reflexive relation]] on $S$, and it is in fact an [[equivalence relation]]; it is the only equivalence relation on $S$ that is also a [[partial order]] (although that fact is somewhat circular).  This relation is often called the __identity relation__ on $S$, either because 'identity' can mean 'equality' or because it is the [[identity]] for [[composition]] of relations.

As a [[subset]] of $S \times S$, the equality relation is often called the __[[diagonal]]__ and written $\Delta_S$ or similarly.  As an abstract set, this subset is [[isomorphism|isomorphic]] to $S$ itself, so one also sees the diagonal as a map, the [[diagonal function]] $S \overset{\Delta_S}\to S \times S$, which maps $x$ to $(x,x)$; note that $x = x$.  This is in [[Set]]; analogous [[diagonal morphisms]] exist in any [[cartesian monoidal category]].

## Related concepts

* **equality**

* [[isomorphism]]

* [[equivalence]]

* [[weak equivalence]]

* [[homotopy equivalence]], [[weak homotopy equivalence]]

* [[equivalence in an (∞,1)-category]]

* [[equivalence of (∞,1)-categories]]

## References

Texts on [[type theory]] typically deal with the subtleties of the notion of _equality_. For instance

* [[Per Martin-Löf]], _Intuitionistic type theory_, Lecture notes (1980)
 {#PML}

[[!redirects equality relation]]
[[!redirects equality predicate]]
[[!redirects equal]]
[[!redirects identity relation]]
[[!redirects diagonal relation]]

[[!redirects definitional equality]]
[[!redirects propositional equality]]

