[[Michio Sato]] introduced an infinite-dimensional Grassmannian in relation to the [[integrable system]]s. It gives a standard way to describe the $\tau$-[[tau-function|function]]. Constructed also by [[Graeme Segal]] and Wilson so it is often called Sato-Segal-Wilson Grassmannian.  

* [[M. Sato]], _The KP hierarchy and infinite dimensional Grassmann manifolds_, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math. 49 Part 1. (pp. 51–66) Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1989.
* G. Segal, G. Wilson, _Loop groups and equations of KdV type_, Publ. Math. IHES __61__, 5–65 (1985)

Textbooks include 

* [[Andrew Pressley]], [[Graeme Segal]], _Loop groups_, Clarendon Press 1989

* T. Miwa, M. Jimbo, E. Date, _Solitons: differential equations, symmetries and infinite dimensional algebras_ (translated from Japanese by Miles Reid) Cambridge Tracts in Math. 135, 120 pp.

Other references

* [[Mattia Cafasso]], Chao-Zhong Wu, _Tau functions and the limit of block Toeplitz determinants_ [arxiv/1404.5149](https://arxiv.org/abs/1404.5149)

> A classical way to introduce tau functions for integrable hierarchies of solitonic equationsis by means of the Sato–Segal–Wilson infinite-dimensional Grassmannian. Every point in the Grassmannian is naturally related to a [[Riemann–Hilbert problem]] on the unit circle, for which Bertola proposed a tau function that generalizes the Jimbo–Miwa–Ueno tau function for isomonodromic deformation problems. In this paper, we prove that the Sato–Segal–Wilson tau functionand the (generalized) Jimbo–Miwa–Ueno isomonodromy tau function coincide under a very general setting, by identifying each of them to the large-size limit of a block Toeplitz determinant. As an application, we give a new definition of tau function for Drinfeld–Sokolov hierarchies (and their generalizations) by means of infinite-dimensional Grassmannians, and clarify their relation with other tau functions given in the literature.

* Dinakar Muthiah, Alex Weekes, Oded Yacobi, _The equations defining affine Grassmannians in type A and a conjecture of Kreiman, Lakshmibai, Magyar, and Weyman_ [arxiv/1708.06076](https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.06076)

> The affine Grassmannian of $SL_n$ admits an embedding into the Sato Grassmannian, which further admits a [[Plücker embedding]] into the projectivization of Fermion Fock space...

[[!redirects Segal-Wilson Grassmannian]]
[[!redirects Sato-Segal-Wilson Grassmannian]]