**Durmuş Ali Demir** (born March 10, 1967) is a Turkish theoretical physicist at Sabancı University since 2019. He was a dean of the Graduate School of Engineering and Sciences at the Izmir Institute of Technology where he was the ex-chair of the Physics Department. His research areas include supersymmetric standard model, extra dimensions and general relativity.

##Research##
His research area is mainly the Particle Physics (model building, phenomenology) and its applications to astrophysical and cosmological problems (astroparticle physics). He works, to a lesser extent, also on quantum physics (tunneling time and dynamics). He is interested in particle physics as a model-builder and phenomenologist. The ATLAS and CMS experiments at CERN have made a big surprise to find no new particles other than the Higgs particle. This has left physicists with a compelling question: What is then the mechanism that tames the destabilizing quantum fluctuations? To this end, “symmergent gravity” framework He came up with in recent years provides a viable mechanism in that gravity emerges for conservation of the electric and color charges, and gravitational constant brings in a new physics sector which must couple to the known matter “see-sawly”. The framework arises by extending the usual equivalence principle (between the flat and curved metrics) to involve curvature (between the UV cutoff and the affine curvature). The symmergent gravity with see-sawic new physics makes robust predictions that can be tested at collider experiments or astrophysical and cosmological observations.



##EDUCATION##

*1993 – 1995    Ph. D. Physics, METU

*1991 – 1993    M. Sc. Physics, METU

*1988 – 1991    B. Sc. (Minor) Physics, METU

*1987 – 1991    B. Sc. Electrical and Electronics Engineering, METU

*1986 – 1987    English Prep School, METU

 

##AFFILIATIONS##

*2003 – 2019    Professor, Department of Physics, İzmir Institute of Technology, 35430 Urla, İzmir, Turkey

*2000 – 2003    Post-Doctoral Fellow, Theoretical Physics Institute (TPI), University of Minnesota, USA

*1998 – 2000    Post-Doctoral Fellow, International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Trieste, Italy

*1996 – 1997    Post-Doctoral Fellow, Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, USA

*1991 – 1995    RA/Instructor, Department of Physics, METU

 

##ADMINISTRATIVE POSITIONS##

*2011 – 2011    Director, Graduate School, IZTECH

*2005 – 2007    Advisor, TÜBİTAK-TBAG

*2005 – 2007    Dean, Faculty of Science, IZTECH

*2004 – 2010    Chairperson, Department of Physics, IZTECH

 

##INTERNATIONAL HONORS AND AWARDS##

Alexander von Humboldt Foundation — Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel Research Award (2007)

 

##NATIONAL HONORS AND AWARDS##

*TÜBİTAK Incentive Prize TÜBİTAK (2005)

*TÜBA Incentive Prize TÜBA (2004)

*SİMAVİ Prize (Natural Sciences) TGC (2001)

*Parlar Foundation Incentive Prize (1997)

 

##MEMBERSHIP TO INTERNATIONAL ACADEMIES##

the World Academy of Sciences (TWAS) (2009)

 

##MEMBERSHIP TO NATIONAL ACADEMIES##

the Science Academy (BA) – Istanbul (2011)

 

##EDITORIAL BOARD MEMBERSHIP##

Letters in High Energy Physics (LHEP) (2017)

 

##ASSOCIATIONS WITH INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS##

Member, CERN Compact Muon Solenoid Experiment (CMS) (2006 – 2012/ 2017 – )


##RESEARCH INTERESTS##

*Particle Physics:                                             Electroweak Stability (gravity from charge conservation)

*Quantum Physics:                                         Tunneling (tunneling time, tunneling dynamics)

*Astroparticle Physics & Cosmology:           Dark Matter, Inflation (affine gravity)

 

##COMPLETED AND ON-GOING RESEARCH PROJECTS##

*Higgs Mass Constraints on New Physics    (PI; TÜBİTAK; 2019 — )

*Search for Light Scalar Quarks at CMS     (Res;  TAEK; 2017 — )

*Finger-Printing Higgs Fine-Tuning at Colliders    (PI;  TÜBİTAK; 2015 — 2017)

*Anomaly Detection and New Particle Searches      (Res;  TÜBİTAK; 2013 — 2015)

*Search for Light Top Squarks at CMS     (PI;  TAEK; 2012 — 2014)

*A New Mechanism for Pulsar Kicks    (PI; TÜBİTAK; 2010 — 2012)

*Search for Supersymmetric Forces at CMS     (PI;  TAEK; 2009 — 2011)

*Search for Dark Matter at CMS    (PI;  TÜBİTAK; 2005 — 2007)

 

##INITIATIVES FOR AN ADVANCED RESEARCH CENTER##

ICTP – Eurasian Center for Advanced Research    (with Prof. N. Bulut and Prof. T. Senger (Director), Nov. 2011)


##Teaching##
He has been teaching both at the graduate and undergraduate levels. In teaching, he believes, a “how-not-to” approach enriched with a “yes-but-why” active discussion plays a crucial role in revealing the essence of the topic. Also important are take-home exams and brief classroom exams. This teaching methodology, to his experience, has the potential to raise knowledge and awareness of students towards their academic or industrial careers. Indeed, he has witnessed how some inadequate-background, unmotivated physics students endeavored to earn TÜBİTAK undergrad projects. He has also witnessed how engineering students have rapidly adapted to advanced physics topics. For years,he has guided promising students to research and, in this regard, he has delivered various talks to high-school and undergrad students.

 

##FREQUENTLY TAUGHT COURSES##

Quantum Field Theory; General Relativity; Quantum Mechanics

 

##STUDENTS SUPERVISED##

*Post-Doctoral Students: Beste Korutlu (TÜBİTAK; 2014-2016); Levent Selbuz (2010-2011); Levent Solmaz (2006-2007)

*Doctoral Students: Hemza Azri (2018); Canan Karahan (2016)

*Master Students: Elif Şahin (2017); Kemal Gültekin (2016); Özer Özdal (2016); Ozan Sargın (2014); Tuğrul Güner (2014); Aslı Altaş (2013); Onur Tosun (2012); Selin Soysal (2012); Hale Sert (2010); Canan Karahan (2010); Aslı Sabancı (2008); Alper Hayreter (2008); Hanif Tanyıldızı (2007); Beyhan Puliçe (2006); Sevdiye Mutlu (2006); Altan Çakır (2006)

*Bachelor Students: Ceren Bayraktar (2019); Uğurcan Erdem (2013); Habib Gültekin (2011); [[Ali Övgün]] (2010); Göktuğ Karpat (2007); Banu Yaman (2005); Aslı Uğur (2004)

*Bachelor TÜBİTAK Projects: [Onur Akbal, Onur Benli, Mehmet Günay] (2009-2010); [Onur Tosun, Seçil Gürkan] (2008-2009); [Günnur Görücü, Serap Yiğen] (2006-2008); [Ozan Arslan, Tuna Demircik, Durmuş Karabacak] (2006-2008)

[Homepage](http://myweb.sabanciuniv.edu/durmusdemir/)
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Durmus_A._Demir)
[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=P2e-HFIAAAAJ&hl=tr&oi=ao)

category: people
