###Brief Biography###
He was born in Agios Nicholaos/ Paphos/ Cyprus in 1949 with pre-university education in Limassol. His university education (including the post graduate) was completed at the Physics Department of the Middle East Technical University (METU)/ Ankara. As a research fellow he visited the University of Texas at Austin before completing Ph.D (1978) at METU. During the years 1981-1990 he worked at the KAAU/ Jeddah/ S. Arabia. He is a professor of physics at the Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU) since 1990. He is specialized on Einstein`s General Relativity and allied subjects. In such a highly challenging area he published more than 150 articles. In summary his research interest covers: Exact solutions to Einstein equations, Gravitational waves, Theories of black holes and wormholes.


###Personal life###

He took his surname after his father's name, "Halil". He is married with three children.

###Selected papers###
*Y.Nutku and M.Halil, Phys. Rev. Lett.39, 1379-1382 (1977). “Colliding Impulsive Gravitational Waves”

*M.Halilsoy Il Nuovo Cimento B Series 11,Vol 102B, N.6 (1988). "Cross-polarized cylindrical gravitational waves of Einstein and Rosen"

*M.Halilsoy, Phys. Rev. D33, 3127-3129 (1986). “Similarity Solutions for Self-Dual SU(2) Fields”

*A. Ovgun, M. Halilsoy, Astrophys.Space Sci. 361 (2016) no.7, 214. "Existence of traversable wormholes in the spherical stellar systems "

*S. Habib Mazharimousavi, M. Halilsoy, "5D black hole solution in Einstein-Yang-Mills-Gauss-Bonnet theory"


[Google Schoolar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=l-xvfqcAAAAJ&hl=tr&oi=ao)
[Inspirehep](https://beta.inspirehep.net/authors/1039685)
[Publons](https://publons.com/researcher/1660832/mustafa-halilsoy/)
