## Idea

One can turn [[monads]] into [[adjunctions]] and adjunctions into monads, but one doesn\'t always return where one started.  Every monad comes from an adjunction, but only a _monadic adjunction_ comes from a monad.  (To be fair, there are two ways to turn a monad into an adjunction, given by the [[Kleisli category]] and the [[Eilenberg–Moore category]]; we are talking about the latter here.)


## Definition

We give the definitions in [[Cat]] and leave it to future readers and writers to generalise.

Let $(C,D,\ell,r,\iota,\epsilon)$ be an adjunction in $Cat$; that is, $\ell: C \to D$ and $r: D \to C$ are [[adjoint functors]] with $\ell \dashv r$, where $\iota$ and $\epsilon$ are the unit and counit.  Let $T$ be $r \circ \ell$; $T$ has the structure of a monad on $C$, so consider the [[Eilenberg–Moore category]] $C^T$ of [[module for a monad|modules (algebras)]] for $T$.  Then $r \circ \epsilon$ is a [[functor]] $k: D \to C^T$.

The adjunction $\ell \dashv r$ is __monadic__ if this functor $k$ is an [[equivalence of categories]].  

## Beck's monadicity theorem

__Beck's Monadicity Theorem__ gives a necessary and sufficient condition for an adjunction to be monadic.  Namely, the adjunction $(C,D,\ell,r,\iota,\epsilon)$ is monadic iff:

*  $r$ reflects isomorphisms; and
   
*  $D$ has coequalizers of $r$-split coequalizer pairs, and $r$ preserves those coequalizers.


## References

*  [[Michael Barr]] and [[Charles Wells]], _Toposes, Triples and Theories_ ([online](http://www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/pub/ttt.html))


## Discussion

[[John Baez]]:  We read above: "One can turn [[monads]] into [[adjunctions]] and adjunctions into monads, but one doesn\'t always return where one started."  This suggests that there is something like an _adjunction_ between monads and adjunctions!  What's the precise story?  

I imagine something like this: there's a functor (or 2-functor) 

$$ [adjunctions] \to [monads] $$

and this has left and right adjoints (or 2-adjoints)

$$ Kleisli : [monads] \to [adjunctions] $$

$$ Eilenberg Moore: [monads] \to [adjunctions] $$

As evidence, note that the [[Kleisli category]] gives the initial object among adjunctions that give rise to a specified monad, while the [[Eilenberg-Moore category]] gives the terminal one.  See the [Wikipedia article](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monad_%28category_theory%29#Monads_and_adjunctions).

Zoran Škoda: the best-well-known article on monads, R. Street, _Formal theory of monads_, JPAA 2, 149--168, 1972, has the basic fact that Eilenberg-Moore construction as a correspondence from monads to categories, extends to a 2-functor which is right 2-adjoint to the trivial monad 2-functor and the left adjoint is the underlying 2-functor (forgetting actions). Now you are trying to view EM construction as an adjoint to adjunctions to monads correspondence. First of all, I could imagine several different 2-categories of adjunctions, hence several different questions in the game (and monads make 2-category in more than one way, but with lessvariety than adjunctions). But there are better people to ask about this...

[[!redirects Beck's Monadicity Theorem]]
[[!redirects Beck’s Monadicity Theorem]]
[[!redirects Beck Monadicity Theorem]]
[[!redirects Beck's monadicity theorem]]
[[!redirects Beck’s monadicity theorem]]
[[!redirects Beck monadicity theorem]]