
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}


## Idea

An interesting subclass of [[quantum field theory|quantum field theories]] is thought to arise from some kind of process that reads in certain -- usually [[differential geometry|differential geometric]] -- data, interprets this data as specifying the dynamics of some physical system, and spits out the [[quantum field theory]] that encodes the time evolution of this system.

Historically, it was an approximation to the true time evolution that was originally found and studied, by Newton, Maxwell, Einstein and others. This is now known as "[[classical physics]]". The true dynamics in turn is "quantum physics".

In view of this, quantization is often understood as a [[retraction|right inverse]] to the procedure that sends the full quantum dynamics to its [[classical limit]]. As such it is not well defined, i.e. unique, when it exists. Additional structures sometimes make it unique. 


## Related entries

* **quantization**

  * [[deformation quantization]]

  * [[geometric quantization]], [[higher geometric quantization]]

  * [[path integral]]

  * [[semiclassical approximation]]

  * [[coherent state]]

  * [[quantization via the A-model]]

* [[gauge transformation]]

  * [[BV-BRST formalism]]

* [[perturbation theory]]

* overview: [[reductions deformations resolutions in physics]]

## References 


A general geometrically inclined introduction can be found in 

* Sean Bates, Alan Weinstein, _Lectures on the geometry of quantization_, [pdf](http://www.math.berkeley.edu/~alanw/GofQ.pdf)

* N. P. Landsman, _Mathematical topics between classical and quantum mechanics_, Springer Monographs in Math. 1998. xx+529 pp. 

A proposal for a full formalization of the notion of quantization for "finite" theories such as [[Dijkgraaf-Witten theory]] is in

* [[Dan Freed]], [[Mike Hopkins]], [[Jacob Lurie]], [[Constantin Teleman]], _[[Topological Quantum Field Theories from Compact Lie Groups]]_ ([arXiv:0905.0731](http://arxiv.org/abs/0905.0731))

A historical discussion by [[Zoran Škoda|one]] of the $n$labizants is here: [mathlight:quantization](http://mathlight.wordpress.com/2010/03/19/quantization). See also Urs's manifesto at [[schreiber:Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Field and Perturbative String Theory]].

* [[Nikolai Reshetikhin]], _Lectures on quantization of gauge systems_, [arxiv/1008.1411](http://arxiv.org/abs/1008.1411)

* [[Sergey Gukov]], [[Edward Witten]], _Branes and quantization_, [arxiv/0809.0305](hhttp://arxiv.org/abs/0809.0305) 
