
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Symplectic geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include symplectic geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

__Symplectic geometry__ is a branch of [[differential geometry]] studying [[symplectic manifold]]s and some generalizations; it originated as a formalization of the mathematical apparatus of [[classical mechanics]] and geometric optics (and the related [[semiclassical approximation|WKB-method]] in [[quantum mechanics]] and, more generally, the method of stationary phase in [[harmonic analysis]]). A wider branch including symplectic geometry is [[Poisson geometry]] and a sister branch in odd dimensions is [[contact geometry]]. A special and central role in the subject belongs to certain real-like half-dimensional submanifolds, called [[Lagrangian submanifold|lagrangian (or Lagrangean) submanifolds]], which are in some sense classical points. Symplectic geometry radically changed after the 1985 article of [[Mikhail Gromov]] on pseudoholomorphic curves and the subsequent work of [[Andreas Floer]] giving birth to symplectic topology or "hard methods" of symplectic geometry. 


## Applications 

* In its application to [[physics]], symplectic geometry is the fundamental mathematical language for [[Hamiltonian mechanics]], [[geometric quantization]], geometrical optics. 


* A tremendous amount of insight into higher [[Lie theory]] ([[Lie groupoid]]s, [[Lie ∞-groupoid]]s, [[Lie ∞-algebroid]]s) has derived from [[Alan Weinstein]]'s long-term project of understanding the role of symplectic geometry in [[geometric quantization]]. See there for more details.

+--{.query}
[[Zoran ?koda]]: it is true that large influence of Weinstein's program can not be overestimated, but it is not the origin of these considerations; it rather builds up on earlier fundamental works of Kirillov, Kostant, Souriau who invented geometric quantization, all of them originally in symplectic context; and the florishing of the subject from mid 1960s till mid 1980-s is related to their work; and other related tracks of Guillemin, Sternberg, Kashiwara, Karasev, Arnold and so on; and vast developments in harmonic analysis and representation theory (Kostant, Auslander, Vogan, Wallach, Stein...), [[microlocal analysis]] ([[Kashiwara]], Saito, Hormander, Maslov, Karasev, Duistermaat...),  [[integrable system]]s/[[quantum group]]s (this is more into more general Poisson geometry: Lie-Poisson groups, classical r-matrices, bihamiltonian systems...), and  related approaches to quantization (Berezin method, [[coherent state]]s...).  
=--

* [[T-duality]] and (related) [[mirror symmetry]] interchange the symplectic data and complex algebraic geometry data. Some cases of both the symplectic and complex algebraic picture can be unified and studied in a broader concept of [[generalized complex geometry]].


## Related concepts

* There is a [[vertical categorification]] of symplectic geometry to [[higher symplectic geometry]]. This involves  [[multisymplectic geometry]] and the geometry of [[symplectic Lie n-algebroid]]s. And their combination.

  See [[higher symplectic geometry]]

* [[holomorphic symplectic geometry]]

[[!include infinity-CS theory for binary non-degenerate invariant polynomial - table]]


## References

Introductions include

* Rolf Berndt, _An introduction to symplectic geometry_ ([pdf](http://www.ams.org/bookstore/pspdf/gsm-26-prev.pdf))

Discussion from the point of view of [[homological algebra]] of [[abelian sheaves]] is in

* C. Viterbo, _An introduction to symplectic topology through sheaf theory_ (2010) ([pdf](http://www.math.polytechnique.fr/cmat/viterbo/Eilenberg/Eilenberg.pdf))

The notion of symplectic geometry may be understood as the mathematical structure that underlies the physics of [[Hamiltonian mechanics]]. A classical monograph that emphasizes this point of view is

* [[Vladimir Arnold]], _[[Mathematical methods of classical mechanics]]_ 

For more on this see [[Hamiltonian mechanics]]. 

Symplectic geometry is also involved in [[geometric optics]], [[geometric quantization]] and the study of oscillatory integrals and [[microlocal analysis]]. Books concentrating on these topics include

* [[Victor Guillemin]], [[Shlomo Sternberg]], _Geometric asymptotics_, Amer. Math. Soc. 1977 [free online](http://www.ams.org/online_bks/surv14)

* Sean Bates, [[Alan Weinstein]], _[[Lectures on the geometry of quantization]]_, [pdf](http://www.math.berkeley.edu/~alanw/GofQ.pdf)

* J.J. Duistermaat, _Fourier integral operators_, Progress in Mathematics, Birkh&#228;user 1995 (and many other references at [[microlocal analysis]]).

* [[Alan Weinstein]], _Symplectic geometry_, (survey)  Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 5 (1981), 1-13, [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/S0273-0979-1981-14911-9)
* N. R. Wallach, _Symplectic geometry and Fourier analysis_, Math. Sci. Press, Brookline, Mass., 1977.
* wikipedia [symplectic geometry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symplectic_geometry)
Application: "Jacobi's elimination of nodes" is moved to [[equivariant localization and elimination of nodes]]. 

A proof of the Arnold conjecture in symplectic geometry is in 

* Mohammed Abouzaid, Andrew J. Blumberg, _Arnold Conjecture and Morava K-theory_, ([arXiv:2103.01507](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.01507))
