
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Geometric quantization
+--{: .hide}
[[!include geometric quantization - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Symplectic geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include symplectic geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

With a [[symplectic manifold]] regarded as a [[classical mechanical system]], _geometric quantization_ is one formalization of the notion of [[quantization]] of this to a [[quantum mechanical system]].

The idea is to 

1. realize the [[symplectic form]] as the [[curvature]] of a $U(1)$-[[principal bundle]] with [[connection on a bundle|connection]] (which requires the form to have integral [[period]]s);

1. choose a [[polarization]] -- a splitting of the abstract [[phase space]] into "coordinates" and "momenta";

and then form

1. a [[Hilbert space]] of [[state]]s as the space of [[section]]s of the associated [[line bundle]] which depend only on the "coordinates" (not on the "momenta");

1. associate with every function on the symplectic manifold -- every [[Hamiltonian]] -- an [[operator]] on this Hilbert space.


The approach is due to Kirillov ("orbit method"), Kostant and Souriau. It is closely related to [[Berezin quantization]] and the subject of [[coherent states]].

In a long term project [[Alan Weinstein]] and many of his students have followed the idea that the true story behind this prescription crucially involves [[symplectic Lie groupoid]]s: [[higher symplectic geometry]]. See [[geometric quantization of symplectic groupoids]] for more on this.


### Overview 

Geometric quantization is a marvelous tool for understanding the relation between classical physics and [[quantum field theory|quantum physics]]. However, it's a bit like a power tool -- you have to be an expert to operate it without running the risk of seriously injuring your brain. Here's a brief sketch of how it goes. This is pretty terse; for the details you'll have to read the series of articles on geometric quantization on the sci.physics.research archive.

1. We start with a *classical phase space*: mathematically, this is a [[manifold]] $X$ with a [[symplectic geometry|symplectic structure]] $\omega$.

1. Then we do *prequantization*: this gives us a Hermitian [[vector bundle|line bundle]] $L$ over $X$, equipped with a $U(1)$ [[connection on a bundle|connection]] $D$ whose curvature equals $i \omega$. $L$ is called the **[[prequantum line bundle]]**.

   **Warning:** we can only do this step if $\omega$ satisfies the *Bohr--Sommerfeld condition*, which says that $\omega/2\pi$ defines an [[integral cohomology]] class. If this condition holds, $L$ and $D$ are determined up to [[isomorphism]], but not canonically.

1. The [[Hilbert space]] $H_0$ of square-integrable [[section]]s of $L$ is called the *prequantum Hilbert space*. This is not yet the Hilbert space of our quantized theory -- it's too big. But it's a good step in the right direction. In particular, we can *prequantize classical observables*: there's a map sending any smooth function on $X$ to an operator on $H_0$. This map takes [[Poisson bracket]]s to [[commutator]]s, just as one would hope. The formula for this map involves the [[connection on a bundle|connection]] $D$.

1. To cut down the prequantum Hilbert space, we need to choose a *[[polarization]]*, say $P$. What's this? Well, for each point $x \in X$, a polarization picks out a certain subspace $P_x$ of the complexified [[tangent bundle|tangent space]] at $x$. We define the *quantum Hilbert space*, $H$, to be the space of all square-integrable sections of $L$ that give zero when we take their [[covariant derivative]] at any point $x$ in the direction of any vector in $P_x$. The quantum Hilbert space is a subspace of the prequantum Hilbert space.

   **Warning:** for $P$ to be a polarization, there are some crucial technical conditions we impose on the subspaces $P_x$. First, they must be *isotropic*: the complexified symplectic form $\omega$ must vanish on them. Second, they must be *Lagrangian*: they must be maximal isotropic subspaces. Third, they must vary smoothly with $x$. And fourth, they must be *integrable*.

1. The easiest sort of polarization to understand is a *real polarization*. This is where the subspaces $P_x$ come from subspaces of the tangent space by complexification. It boils down to this: a real polarization is an integrable distribution $P$ on the classical phase space where each space $P_x$ is Lagrangian subspace of the tangent space $T_x X$.

1. To understand this rigamarole, one must study examples! First, it's good to understand how good old *Schrödinger quantization* fits into this framework. Remember, in [[Schrodinger quantization|Schrödinger quantization]] we take our classical [[phase space]] $X$ to be the [[cotangent bundle]] $T^* M$ of a [[manifold]] $M$ called the *classical configuration space*. We then let our quantum Hilbert space be the space of all square-integrable functions on $M$.

   Modulo some technical trickery, we get this example when we run the above machinery and use a certain god-given real polarization on $X = T*M$, namely the one given by the vertical vectors.

1. It's also good to study the *Bargmann--Segal representation*, which we get by taking $X = \mathbb{C}^n$ with its god-given symplectic structure (the imaginary part of the inner product) and using the god-given *Kähler polarization*. When we do this, our quantum Hilbert space consists of analytic functions on $\mathbb{C}^n$ which are square-integrable with respect to a Gaussian measure centered at the origin.

1. The next step is to *quantize classical observables*, turning them into linear operators on the quantum Hilbert space $H$. Unfortunately, we can't quantize all such observables while still sending [[Poisson bracket]]s to [[commutator]]s, as we did at the prequantum level. So at this point things get trickier and my brief outline will stop. Ultimately, the reason for this problem is that quantization is not a [[functor]] from the [[category]] of symplectic manifolds to the category of Hilbert spaces -- but for that one needs to learn a bit about [[category theory]]. 

### Basic Jargon 

Here are some definitions of important terms. Unfortunately they are defined using other terms that you might not understand. If you are really mystified, you need to read some books on [[differential geometry]] and the math of [[classical mechanics]] before proceeding.

* **complexification**: We can tensor a real vector space with the complex numbers and get a complex vector space; this process is called complexification. For example, we can complexify the tangent space at some point of a manifold, which amounts to forming the space of complex linear combinations of tangent vectors at that point.

* **distribution**: The word "distribution" means many different things in mathematics, but here's one: a "distribution" $V$ on a manifold $X$ is a choice of a subspace $V_x$ of each tangent space $T_p X$, where the choice depends smoothly on $x$.

* **Hamiltonian vector field**: Given a manifold $X$ with a symplectic structure $\omega$, any smooth function $f: X \to \mathbb{R}$ can be thought of as a "Hamiltonian", meaning physically that we think of it as the energy function and let it give rise to a flow on $X$ describing the time evolution of states. Mathematically speaking, this flow is generated by a vector field $v(f)$ called the "Hamiltonian vector field" associated to $f$. It is the unique vector field such that

  $$
    \omega(-, v(f)) = d f
  $$

  In other words, for any vector field $u$ on $X$ we have

  $$
    \omega(u,v(f)) = d f(u) = u f
  $$


  The vector field $v(f)$ is guaranteed to exist by the fact that $\omega$ is nondegenerate.

* **integrable distribution**: A distribution on a manifold $X$ is "integrable" if at least locally, there is a foliation of $X$ by submanifolds such that $V_x$ is the tangent space of the submanifold containing the point $x$.

* **integral cohomology class**: Any closed $p$-form on a manifold $M$ defines an element of the $p$th [[de Rham cohomology]] of $M$. This is a finite-dimensional vector space, and it contains a lattice called the $p$th integral [[cohomology group]] of $M$. We say a cohomology class is integral if it lies in this lattice. Most notably, if you take any $U(1)$ [[connection on a bundle|connection]] on any Hermitian line bundle over $M$, its curvature $2$-form will define an integral cohomology class once you divide it by $2 \pi i$. This cohomology class is called the first [[Chern class]], and it serves to determine the line [[bundle]] up to [[isomorphism]].

* **[[Poisson bracket]]s**: Given a symplectic structure on a manifold $M$ and given two smooth functions on that manifold, say $f$ and $g$, there's a trick for getting a new smooth function $\{f,g\}$ on the manifold, called the Poisson bracket of $f$ and $g$.

  This trick works as follows: given any smooth function $f$ we can take its differential $d f$, which is a $1$-form. Then there is a unique vector field $v(f)$, the Hamiltonian vector field associated to $f$, such that

  $$
    \omega(-,v(f)) = d f
  $$

   Using this we define

   $$
     \{f,g\} = \omega(v(f),v(g))
   $$

   It's easy to check that we also have $\{f,g\} = d g(v(f)) = v(f) g$. So $\{f,g\}$ says how much $g$ changes as we differentiate it in the direction of the Hamiltonian vector field generated by $f$.

   In the familiar case where $M$ is $\mathbb{R}^{2n}$ with momentum and position coordinates $p_i$, $q_i$, the Poisson brackets of $f$ and $g$ work out to be

   $$
     \{f,g\} = \sum_i \frac{d f}{d p_i} \frac{d g}{d q_i} - \frac{d f}{d q_i}\frac{d g}{d p_i}
   $$

* **square-integrable sections**: We can define an inner product on the sections of a Hermitian line bundle over a manifold $X$ with a symplectic structure. The symplectic structure defines a volume form which lets us do the necessary integral. A section whose inner product with itself is finite is said to be square-integrable. Such sections form a Hilbert space $H_0$ called the "prequantum Hilbert space". It is a kind of preliminary version of the Hilbert space we get when we quantize the classical system whose phase space is $X$.

* **symplectic structure**: A symplectic structure on a manifold $M$ is a closed $2$-form $\omega$ which is nondegenerate in the sense that for any nonzero tangent vector $u$ at any point of $M$, there is a tangent vector $u$ at that point for which $w(u,v)$ is nonzero.

* **$U(1)$ [[connection on a bundle|connection]]**: The [[group]] $U(1)$ is the group of unit complex numbers. Given a complex line bundle $L$ with an inner product on each fiber $L_x$, a $U(1)$ connection on $L$ is a connection such that parallel translation preserves the inner product.

* **vertical vectors**: Given a bundle $E$ over a manifold $M$, we say a tangent vector to some point of $E$ is vertical if it projects to zero down on $M$. 



## Definition

### Prequantum line bundle

Given the [[symplectic form]] $\omega$, a 
[[prequantum circle bundle]] for it is a 
[[circle n-bundle with connection|circle bundle with connection]] whose [[curvature]] is $\omega$. 

In other words, prequantization is a lift of $\omega$ through the curvature-[[exact sequence]] of [[ordinary differential cohomology]] (see there).

The multiple of the [[Chern class]] of this line bundle is identified with the inverse _[[Planck constant]]_.


### Quantum states

(...)

### Quantum operators

Let $\nabla : X \to \mathbf{B} U(1)_{conn}$ be a
[[prequantum line bundle]] $E \to X$ [[connection on a bundle|with connection]] for $\omega$. Write $\Gamma_X(E)$ for its space of smooth [[sections]], the _[[prequantum space of states]]_.


+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

For $f \in C^\infty(X, \mathbb{C})$ a function on phase space, the corresponding **[[quantum operator (in geometric quantization)|quantum operator]]** is the linear map

$$
  \hat f : \Gamma_X(E) \to \Gamma_X(E)
$$

given by

$$
  \psi \mapsto -i \nabla_{v_f} \psi + f \cdot \psi
  \,,
$$

where 

* $v_f$ is the [[Hamiltonian vector field]]
corresponding to $f$;

* $\nabla_{v_f} : \Gamma_X(E) \to \Gamma_X(E)$ is the [[covariant derivative]] of sections along $v_f$ for the given choice of prequantum connection;

* $f \cdot (-) : \Gamma_X(E) \to \Gamma_X(E)$ is the operation of degreewise multiplication pf sections.

=--

### Polarizations
 {#Polarizations}

For $(X, \omega)$ a [[symplectic manifold]], a **[[polarization]]** is a [[foliation]] of $X$ by [[Lagrangian submanifolds]] with respect to $\omega$.

After a choice of [[prequantum line bundle]] $\nabla$ lifting $\omega$, a **Bohr-Sommerfeld [[leaf]]** of a polarization is a leaf on which the prequantum line bundle is not just flat, but also trivializable as a [[circle bundle]].

### Metaplectic correction

For the moment see at _[[metaplectic correction (in geometric quantization)]]_.



### Quantum state space


(space of sections of the prequantum line bundle whose [[covariant derivative]] along the polarizaiton leaves vanishes...)

For the moment see at **[[space of states (in geometric quantization)]]_.

## Properties

### Characteristic central extensions

To a large extent geometric quantization is realized by [[central extension]] of various Lie groups arising in [[classical mechanics]]/[[symplectic geometry]].

[[!include geometric quantization extensions - table]]




## Examples


### Cotangent bundles -- Schrödinger representation

For the [[particle]] propagating on the [[line]]
with respect to some standard [[action functional]], 
the  [[phase space]] is 
the [[cotangent bundle]] 
$T^* \mathbb{R} \simeq \mathbb{R}^2$,
where the [[isomorphism]] is given by choosing standard
[[coordinate chart|coordinates]], $\{q,p\}$.

The [[symplectic form]] is the canonical [[volume form]],
which in these coordinates reads

$$
  \omega = d p \wedge d q
  \,.
$$

A [[prequantum line bundle]] for this is given by the
trivial line bundle equipped with the 
[[connection on a bundle|connection]] that is given
by the globally defined 1-form

$$
  \theta := q \wedge d p
  \,.
$$

A [[section]] of this complex line bundle is canonically identified simply with a $\mathbb{C}$-valued smooth function on $\mathbb{R}^2$.

A choice of [[foliation]] of phase space is given by constant-$q$-slices

$$
  \Lambda_q = \subset \mathbb{R}^2
  \,.
$$

The polarization condition is that the [[covariant derivative]] along the [[leafs]] vanishes

$$
  \nabla_{\partial/\partial p} \psi = 0
  \,,
$$

which with the above choice of connection is equivalently

$$
  \frac{\partial}{\partial p} \psi + i q \psi = 0
  \,.
$$

The solutions to this [[differential equation]] are of the form

$$
  \psi(q,p) = \psi(q,0) \exp(i p q)
  \,.
$$

The space of these quantum states is (noncanonically) identified with the space of complex functions on the line by evaluating at $p = 0$.

Since we have the [[hamiltonian vector fields]]

$$
  v_q = \frac{\partial}{\partial p}
$$ 

$$
  v_p = -\frac{\partial}{\partial q}  
$$

the action of the [[quantum operator (in geometric quantization)|quantum operators]] $\hat q$ and $\hat p$ on these states is

$$
  \hat q \psi = - i \nabla_{\partial/\partial p}\psi + q \psi
  = q \psi
$$

and

$$
  \hat p \psi =  i \nabla_{\partial/ \partial q} \psi + p \psi
  = i \frac{\partial}{\partial q} \psi
  \,.
$$

### Kähler manifolds

If the [[symplectic manifold]] $(X, \omega)$ happens to be also 
a [[Kähler manifold]] there are natural choices of prequantization:

* the [[prequantum line bundle]] is a [[holomorphic line bundle]] since its [[curvature]] is $\omega in T^*_{(1,1)}X$;

* a [[polarization]] is given by the anti-holomorphic tangent bundle $T^{0,1}X$;

* a polarized section is a [[holomorphic section]];

* the [[dimension]] of the [[space of states (in geometric quantization)]] is given by the [[Riemann-Roch theorem]], see ([Hitchin](#Hitchin)).

Applied to a [[symplectic vector space]] this yields the [[Bargmann-Fock representation]] of the [[Heisenberg group]]. 

### Theta functions

See at _[[theta function]]_.

### Quantization of Chern-Simons theory

The [[geometric quantization]] of [[Chern-Simons theory]]
leads to invariants for 3-[[manifolds]]. 
A detailed discussion is in ([Witten 89](#Witten)).


## Related concepts

* [[reductions deformations resolutions in physics]]

* [[quantization]]

  * [[deformation quantization]]

  * **geometric quantization**, [[higher geometric quantization]]

    * [[geometric quantization of symplectic groupoids]] 

  * [[path integral]]

  * [[semiclassical approximation]]



## References

### General

Original references include

* [[Jean-Marie Souriau]], _Structure des systemes dynamiques_ Dunod, Paris (1970)

  Translated and reprinted as (see section V.18 for geometric quantization):

  [[Jean-Marie Souriau]], _Structure of dynamical systems - A symplectic view of physics_, Brikhäuser (1997)

* [[Bertram Kostant]], _Quantization and unitary representations_, in _Lectures in modern analysis and applications III_, Lecture Notes in Math. 170 (1970), Springer Verlag, 87—208

* [[Bertram Kostant]], _On the definition of quantization_, in _Géométrie Symplectique et Physique Mathématique_, Colloques Intern. CNRS, vol. 237,
Paris (1975) 187—210

* [[Victor Guillemin]], [[Shlomo Sternberg]], _Geometric Asymptotics_, Math. Surveys no. 14, Amer. Math. Soc. (1977) ([web](http://www.ams.org/online%5Fbks/surv14/))

A careful discussion of the polarization-step from prequantization to quantization is in 

* J. &Sacute;niatycki, _Wave functions relative to a real polarization_, Internat. J. Theoret. Phys., 14(4):277–288 (1975)

* J. &Sacute;niatycki, _Geometric Quantization and Quantum Mechanics_, volume 30 of Applied Mathematical Sciences. Springer-Verlag, New York (1980)

Aspects at least of geometric prequantization are usefully discussed also in section II of 

* [[Jean-Luc Brylinski]], _Loop spaces, characteristic classes and geometric quantization_, Birkhäuser (1993)

Further reviews include

* A. Echeverria-Enriquez, M.C. Munoz-Lecanda, N. Roman-Roy, C. Victoria-Monge, _Mathematical Foundations of Geometric Quantization_ Extracta Math. 13 (1998) 135-238 ([arXiv:math-ph/9904008](http://arxiv.org/abs/math-ph/9904008))

* William Gordon Ritter, _Geometric Quantization_ ([arXiv:math-ph/0208008](http://arxiv.org/abs/math-ph/0208008))

The above "Overview" and "Basic Jargon" sections are taken from 

* [[John Baez]], _Geometric Quantization_ ([web](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/quantization.html))

Some useful talk notes include

* Eva Miranda, _From action-angle coordinates to geometric quantization and back_ (2011) ([pdf](http://fdis2011.uni-jena.de/Talks/Eva%20Miranda.pdf))

### Kähler quantization

The special case of Kähler quantization is discussed for instance in 

* [[Nigel Hitchin]], _Flat connections and geometric quantization_, Comm. Math. Phys. 131 (1990), no. 2, 347–380.
 {#Hitchin}

### Examples

The basic example of geometric quantization of a [[symplectic vector space]] is discussed in pretty much every text on the matter for instance [Nohara, starting with example 2.6](#Nohara).

Discussion of geometric quantization of [[Chern-Simons theory]] is for instance in 

* [[Edward Witten]] (lecture notes by Lisa Jeffrey), _New results in Chern-Simons theory_, pages 81 onwards  in: S. Donaldson, C. Thomas (eds.) _Geometry of low dimensional manifolds 2: Symplectic manifolds and Jones-Witten theory_ (1989) ([pdf](http://cs5538.userapi.com/u11728334/docs/06f79688de6f/S_K_Donaldson_Geometry_of_LowDimensional_Ma.pdf))
 {#Witten}

Discussion of geometric quantization of [[abelian varieties]], [[toric varieties]], [[flag varieties]] and its relation to [[theta functions]] is in 

* Yuichi Nohara, _Independence of polarization in geometric quantization_ ([pdf](http://geoquant.mi.ras.ru/nohara.pdf))
 {#Nohara}

* [[Andrei Tyurin]], _Quantization, Classical and quantum field theory and theta functions_ ([arXiv:math/0210466v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0210466v1))
 {#Tyurin}


An appearance of geometric quantization in [[mirror symmetry]] is pointed out in 

* Andrei Tyurin, _Geometric quantization and mirror symmetry_,
([math.AG/9902027](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/9902027))

Geometric quantization of the [[bosonic string]] [[sigma-model]] is discussed in 

* Yue Yua, Han-Ying Guoa, _On the geometric quantization and BRST quantization for bosonic strings_, Physics Letters B Volume 216, Issues 1–2, (1989), Pages 68–74

### Relation to other formalisms

A discussion of the relation to [[deformation quantization]] is in 

* Christoph Nölle, _Geometric and deformation quantization_ ([arXiv:0903.5336](http://arxiv.org/abs/0903.5336))

### Geometric BRST quantization
 {#ReferencesBRST}

The [[Lie algebroid]] version of an [[action groupoid]] is given (dually) by a [[BRST complex]]. Quantization over a BRST complex is hence quantization over an infinitesimal action groupoid. (See at [[higher geometric quantization]]).

Geometric quantization over BRST complexes is discussed in the following articles.

* [[Takashi Kimura]], _BRST Quantization and Poisson Reduction_, PhD Thesis (1990) ([web](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1990PhDT.......142K))

* [[José Figueroa-O’Farrill]], [[Takashi Kimura]], _Geometric BRST quantization_ ([pdf](http://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/~jmf/Research/PVBLICATIONS/gq.pdf))

  _Geometric BRST quantization. I. Prequantization_, Comm. Math. Phys. Volume 136, Number 2 (1991), 209-229. ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104202348))


* [[Gijs Tuynman]], _Geometric quantization of the BRST charge_ Comm. Math. Phys. Volume 150, Number 2 (1992), 237-265. ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104251864), [pdf](http://math.univ-lille1.fr/~gmt/PaperFolder/GQofBRST.pdf))

* [[Ronald Fulp]], _BRST Extension of Geometric Quantization_, Foundations of Physics Volume 37, Number 1 (2007),  ([arXiv:math/0604270](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0604270))


### Variants

References on [[geometric quantization of symplectic groupoids]] are

* Eli Hawkins, _A Groupoid Approach to Quantization_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.SG/0612363))
 {#Hawkins}

[[!redirects geometric prequantization]]
