
This page collects material related to 

* {#Brambilla14} Brambilla et al., 

  **QCD and strongly coupled gauge theories - challenges and perspectives** 

  Eur Phys J C Part Fields. 2014; 74(10): 2981 

  [arXiv:1404.3723](https://arxiv.org/abs/1404.3723)  

  [doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-014-2981-5](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1140%2Fepjc%2Fs10052-014-2981-5)

on open problems, [[theory (physics)|theoretically]] and [[experiment|experimentally]], in [[quantum chromodynamics]] ([[QCD]]), particularly those related to [[non-perturbative effects]] and hence notably to [[confinement]]. 


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Overview

(...)

## The nature of QCD

>  The success of the technique does not remove the challenge of understanding the non-perturbative aspects of the theory. The two aspects are
deeply intertwined. The Lagrangian of QCD is written in terms of quark and gluon degrees of freedom which become apparent at large energy but remain hidden inside hadrons in the low-energy regime. This confinement property is related to the increase of $\alpha_s$ at low energy, but it has never been
demonstrated analytically. 

> We have clear indications of the confinement of quarks into hadrons from both experiments and lattice QCD. Computations of the heavy quark–antiquark potential, for example, display a linear behavior in the quark–antiquark distance, which cannot be obtained in pure perturbation theory. Indeed the two main characteristics of QCD: confinement and the appearance of nearly massless pseudoscalar mesons, emergent from the spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry, are non-perturbative phenomena whose precise understanding continues to be a target of research. 

> Even in the simpler case of gluodynamics in the absence of quarks, we do not have a precise understanding of how a gap in the spectrum is formed and the glueball spectrum is generated.

## Light quarks

### Introduction

### Hadron structure

* [[light quarks]]

* [[chiral perturbation theory]]

* [[form factors]]

* [[pion]]

### Hadron spectroscopy

* [[lattice gauge theory]]

### Chiral dynamics

* [[chiral perturbation theory]]

### Low-energy porecision observables

### Future directions

## Heavy quarks

* [[heavy quarks]]

* [[semileptonic decays]]

* [[quarkonium]]

## Searching for new physics with precision measurement

* [[precision measurement]]

* [[flavour anomalies]]

## Deconfinement

* [[quark-gluon plasma]]

* [[holographic QCD]]

## Nuclear physics and dense QCD in colliders and compact stars

* [[neutron stars]]

## Vacuum structure and infrared QCD

* [[confinement]]

* [[chiral symmetry breaking]]

## Strongly coupled theories and conformal symmetry

* [[integrability]]

* [[supersymmetry]]

* [[super Yang-Mills theory]]

* [[electroweak symmetry breaking]]

* [[AdS/QCD correspondence]]

category: reference
