A common method of construction of representations of groups in [[representation theory]] is to consider the invariant subspaces of the [[induced representation]] (set-theoretic or $L^2$-versions). Induced representation is too big and the Frobenius reciprocity indicates the fact that they are normally not irreducible. Given a subgroup $B\subset G$ and a $B$-module $V$, with $\rho:B\to Aut(V)$ the induced module can be represented as a space of set-theoretic, or $L^2$-sections of the associated bundle $G\times_{G/B} V$ to the principal [[fiber bundle]] $G\to G/B$, at least when these words make sense. In [[geometric quantization]] the method to single out sufficiently small space of sections is to look at sections which are horizontal in the sense of some polarization, or equivalently horizontal for an appropriate choice of the connection on the bundle. 

The first instance is the theorem of Borel-Weil, (A. Borel, Bourbaki Seminar 100, 1950) which asserts that if $B$ is the Borel subgroup of the complex semisimple group $G^{\mathbb{C}}$ (which can be considered as a complexification of the maximal compact subgroup $K\subset G$), then all unitary irreducible representations can be obtained as the spaces of (anti)holomorphic line bundle associated to the principal fibration $G\to G/B$ over the generalized [[flag variety]] $G^{\mathbb{C}}/B\cong G/K$ with the fiber $\mathbb{C}_\chi$ which is the 1-dimensional representation corresponding to a dominant integral character $\chi$, and viceversa, all such spaces of sections are irreducible. The inner product is inherited from the hermitean structure on the line bundle. 

There is an extension to higher cohomologies instead of spaces of sections, so-called Borel-Weil-Bott theorem and numerous extensions, e.g. to Harish-Chandra sheaves to construct the infinite-dimensional representations. The original proof is by geometric and analytic methods; some of the modern extensions of the method use the algebraic [[D-module]] theory and are based on Beilinson-Bernstein localization theorem. There are even extensions to quantum groups. 

* Neil Chriss, Victor Ginzburg, _Representation theory and complex geometry_, Birkhauser 1994
