This page collectes material related to the book

* [[Mannque Rho]], [[Ismail Zahed]] (eds.) 

  _The Multifaceted Skyrmion_, 

  World Scientific 2016 

  [doi:10.1142/9710](https://doi.org/10.1142/9710)

on [[Skyrmions]].

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


### Skyrmions and Nuclei

**Chapter 1**

* {#BattyeMantonSutcliffe10} R. A. Battye, [[Nicholas Manton]], [[Paul Sutcliffe]], _Skyrmions and Nuclei_, pp. 3-39 (2010) ([doi:10.1142/9789814280709_0001](https://doi.org/10.1142/9789814280709_0001)) 


on [[Skyrmions]] as good models for [[atomic nuclei]] all the way up to [[carbon]].


### ...



### Skyrmions and string theory

On the [[skyrmion]] [[model (in theoretical physics)|model]] for [[baryons]] appearing within the [[Sakai-Sugimoto model]] of [[holographic quantum chromodynamics]] in [[string theory]], as the [[boundary field theory]] of [[D=5 super Yang-Mills theory]]:


**Chapter 15**

* {#Sugimoto16} [[Shigeki Sugimoto]], _Skyrmions and String theory_


**Chapter 16**

* {#Yi09} [[Piljin Yi]], _Holographic Baryons_ ([arXiv:0902.4515](https://arxiv.org/abs/0902.4515), [doi:10.1142/9789814280709_0016](https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/9789814280709_0016)), Chapter 16 in: [[Mannque Rho]], [[Ismail Zahed]] (eds.) _[[The Multifaceted Skyrmion]]_, World Scientific 2016 ([doi:10.1142/9710](https://doi.org/10.1142/9710))

> [[QCD]] is a challenging theory. Its most interesting aspects, namely the [[confinement]] of [[color charge|color]] and the [[chiral symmetry breaking]], have defied all analytical approaches. While there are now many data accumulated from the [[lattice gauge theory]], the methodology falls well short of giving us insights on how one may understand these phenomena analytically, nor does it give us a systematic way of obtaining a low energy theory of [[QCD]] below the [[confinement]] [[scale]]. 

> $[...]$

> it has been proposed early on that [[baryons]] are topological [[solitons]], namely [[Skyrmions]]  $[$but$]$ the usual [[Skyrmion]] picture of the [[baryon]] has to be modified significantly in the context of full [[QCD]]. $[...]$ the holographic picture naturally brings a gauge principle in the bulk description of the [[flavor physics|flavor]] dynamics in such a way that all spin one [[mesons]] as well as [[pions]] would enter the $[$ [[Skyrmion|skyrmionic]]-$]$construction of [[baryons]] on the equal footing.

> $[...]$

> [[holographic QCD]] is similar to the [[chiral perturbation theory]] in the sense that we deal with exclusively [[gauge invariance|gauge-invariant]] [[observables|operators]] of the theory. The huge difference is, however, that this new approach tends to treat all [[gauge invariance|gauge-invariant]] objects together. Not only the light [[meson]] [[field (physics)|fields]] like [[pions]] but also heavy [[vector mesons]] and [[baryons]] appear together, at least in principle. In other words, a [[holographic QCD]] deals with all [[color charge|color]]-[[trivial representation|singlets]] simultaneously, giving us a lot more predictive power.

> $[...]$


> The expectation that there exists a more intelligent theory consisting only of [[gauge invariance|gauge-invariant]] objects in the [[large N limit|large Nc limit]] is thus realized via [[string theory]] in a somewhat surprising manner that the master fields, those truly physical degrees of freedom, actually live not in four dimensional Minkowskian world but in five or
higher dimensional curved geometry. This is not however completely unanticipated, and was heralded in the celebrated work by [Eguchi and Kawai in early 1980's](#EguchiKawai82) which is all the more remarkable in retrospect. 

> $[...]$

> To compare against actual [[QCD]], we must fix $[$the [['t Hooft coupling]] and the [[Kaluza-Klein compactification|KK]]-[[scale]]$]$ to fit
both the [[pion]] decay constant $f_\pi$ and the [[mass]] of the first [[vector meson]]. After this fitting, all other infinite number of [[masses]] and [[coupling constants]] are fixed. This version $[$the holographic [[WSS model]]$]$ of the [[holographic QCD]]  is extremely predictive.

> $[...]$

> $[$this$]$ elevates the classic [[skyrmion|Skyrme picture]] based on [[pions]] to a unified model involving all [[vector meson|spin one mesons]] in addition to [[pions]]. This is why the picture is extremely predictive. 

> As we saw in this note, for low momentum processes, such as soft [[pion]] [[scattering amplitude|processes]], soft [[rho meson]] exchanges, and soft elastic scattering of [[photons]], the $[$holographic [[WSS model|WSS]]-$]$model's predictions compare extremely well with experimental data. It is somewhat mysterious that the [[baryon]] sector works out almost as well as the [[meson]] sector






### ...


category: reference
