
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
#### Chern-Weil theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-Chern-Weil theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

An [[instanton]] in plain [[Yang-Mills theory]] on a 4-[[dimension|dimensional]] [[manifold]] $K^{(4)}$ necessarily has a [[positive number|positive]] characteristic [[radius]]. Indeed, in the [[moduli space]] of instantons the would-be point of vanishing characteristc radius corresponds to a [[singularity]] which is unphysical, in that it is not part of the [[phase space]] of the [[theory (physics)|theory]].

But also the [[gauge field]] of [[heterotic string theory]] admits [[instanton]]-configurations on a transversal 4-space, and these are pullbacks of ordinary [[Yang-Mills instantons]] on the [[Euclidean space|Euclidean]] 4-manifold $K^{(4)}$ to a $(6+4)$-dimensional [[product manifold]]-[[spacetimes]] 

\[
  \label{ProductSpacetime}
  X^{(9+1)} \;\simeq\; Q^{(5+1)} \times K^{(4)}
\] 

along the [[projection map]] $Q^{(5+1)} \times K^{(4)} \overset{pr_2}{\longrightarrow} K^{(4)}$.

Therefore it makes sense to ask if, after embedding [[Yang-Mills instantons]] into [[heterotic string theory]] this way, the [[singularity]] in the moduli space of instantons becomes part of the phase space of the theory (now that [[quantum gravity]]-effects are supposedly included) so that instantons of vanishing radius do acquire "stringy" physical meaning after all -- then to be called _small instantons_.


**In HET-O.** A circumstantial but widely accepted argument ([[folklore]]) due to [Witten 96](#Witten96) says that this is indeed the case, and that these _small instantons_ in [[SemiSpin(32)]]-[[heterotic string theory]] are identified with heterotic [[NS5-branes]] [[wrapped brane|wrapped]] on the $Q^{(5+1)}$-factor in (eq:ProductSpacetime) and carrying an exotic [[Sp(1)]]-[[gauge field]] on their worldvolume, identified with the [[SU(2)]]-structure group of a single instanton. 

Indeed, solutions of [[heterotic supergravity]] involving [[positive number|positive]]-[[radius]] [[Yang-Mills instantons]] had been interpreted as [[black brane|black]] [[NS5-branes]] of non-vanishing "thickness" in [Strominger 90](#Strominger90). This makes it plausible that these vanishing-radius small instantons correspond to fundamental hererotic 5-branes of vanishing thickness ([Witten 96, top of p. 9](#Witten96))

More precisely, this $Sp(1)$-gauge field is argued to be a [[non-perturbative effect]] invisible in [[perturbative string theory]], hence distinct from the [[SemiSpin(32)]]- or [[E8]]$\times$[[E8]]-gauge field famously seen in [[perturbative string theory|perturbative]] [[heterotic string theory]]. 

There this interpretation of small instantons as [[wrapped brane|wrapped]] 5-branes really pertains to [[M5-branes]] in [[heterotic M-theory]].

**In F-theory**. Under [[duality between F-theory and heterotic string theory]] the argument of [Witten 96](#Witten96) was claimed to be confirmed in [Aspinwall-Gross 96](#AspinwallGross96), [Aspinwall-Morrison 97](#AspinwallMorrison97).

**In Type I.** On the other hand, under [[duality between type I and heterotic string theory]] one expects to see [[duality in string theory|dually]] as a phenomenon visible in perturbative [[type I string theory]], now pertaining to [[D5-D9-brane bound states]]. Indeed, in general [[Dp-D(p+4)-brane bound states]] are argued to exhibit instantons in the [[worldvolume]] gauge theory of the $D(p+4)$-brane, and specifically for [[D5-D9-brane bound states]] in [[type I string theory]] one finds ([Witten 96. Section 3](#Witten96)) from [[orientifold]]-analysis ([Gimon-Polchinski 96, p. 7](#GimonPolchinski96)) that the [[gauge group]] on a single D5 is $Sp(2)$.

**In HET-E.** Similarly under [[T-duality]] of the [[SemiSpin(32)]]- to the [[E8]]$\times$[[E8]]-[[heterotic string]] the small instantons should also correspond to heterotic 5-branes there. That this is the case was argued, indirectly, in [Ganor-Hanany 96](#GanorHanany96), appealing now to [[orientifold]] image pairs under the [[Horava-Witten theory|Horava-Witten]] $\mathbb{Z}_2$-action.

## Related concepts

[[!include brane bound states -- table]]

## References

### General

* {#Strominger90} [[Andrew Strominger]], _Heterotic solitons_, _Nuclear Physics B, Volume 343, Issue 1, Pages 167-184, 1990 (<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(90)90599-9">doi:10.1016/0550-3213(90)90599-9</a>)

* {#Witten96} [[Edward Witten]], _Small Instantons in String Theory_, Nucl. Phys. B460:541-559, 1996 ([arXiv:hep-th/9511030](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9511030))

* {#GimonPolchinski96} [[Eric Gimon]], [[Joseph Polchinski]], _Consistency Conditions for Orientifolds and D-Manifolds_, Phys. Rev. D54:1667-1676, 1996 ([arxiv:hep-th/9601038](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9601038))

* {#GanorHanany96} [[Ori Ganor]], [[Amihay Hanany]], _Small $E_8$ Instantons and Tensionless Non-critical Strings_, Nucl. Phys. B474 (1996) 122-140 ([arXiv:hep-th/9602120](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9602120))

* {#AspinwallGross96} [[Paul Aspinwall]], [[Mark Gross]], _The $SO(32)$ Heterotic String on a K3 Surface_, Phys. Lett. B387 (1996) 735-742 ([arXiv:hep-th/9605131](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9605131))

* {#AspinwallMorrison97} [[Paul Aspinwall]], [[David Morrison]], _Point-like Instantons on K3 Orbifolds_, Nucl. Phys. B503 (1997) 533-564 ([arXiv:hep-th/9705104](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9705104))

* {#Johnson98} [[Clifford Johnson]], _Études on D-Branes_, in: [[Mike Duff]] et. al. (eds.) _Nonperturbative aspects of strings, branes and supersymmetry_, Proceedings, Trieste, Italy, March 23-April 3, 1998 ([arXiv:hep-th/9812196](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9812196), [spire:481393](https://inspirehep.net/literature/481393))



[[!include flavor on heterotic M5-branes -- references]]



[[!redirects small instantons]]