
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Philosophy
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include philosophy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{:toc}

> Was Maimon anbelangt, sage ich Ihnen, was ich denke. Meine Verehrung für das Talent dieses Mannes ist grenzenlos; und ich glaube fest, daß durch ihn sogar die Kantische Kritik, so wie sie durchgängig und auch von Ihnen verstanden worden, völlig umgestoßen wird. Das alles hat er getan, ohne daß es jemand merkte. Die zukünftigen Jahrhunderte werden, glaub ich, unsres Zeitalters spotten.     _Fichte Briefentwurf an Reinhold März/April 1795_


**Salomon Maimon** (1754?-1800) was a Polish-Lithuanian philosopher of Jewish origin. His father being a rabbi, Maimon was trained as a talmud scholar but his study of Spinoza and intellectual curiosity led him eventually to travel to Berlin then a center of Jewish enlightenment headed by the rationalist philosopher Moses Mendelssohn. There he developed a "neo-leibnizian" philosophy in constant dialogue with Kant's transcendental philosophy that anticipated ideas evolving into the systems of German idealism e.g. he defined philosophy as the science of the form of science which parallels Fichte's concept of _Wissenschaftslehre_ and foreshadows Hegel's absolute idea; he claimed that antinomies of reason are more ubiquituous than just the paralogisms listed in Kant's [[Critique of Pure Reason]] and produced the first broadly neo-aristotelian logic in the context of transcendental philosophy, two things that presumably weren't lost on Hegel though the latter doesn't refer directly to Maimon in his writings. 

Maimon's acquaintance with mathematics (as well as with Leibniz' philosophy) led him to two other highly original and modern proposals: on the hand, he stressed the role of [[infinitesimal|infinitesimals]] in philosophical epistemology, an idea that was rediscovered by [[Hermann Cohen]] in the context of neo-Kantianism eighty years later; on the other hand, he held a relational view of [[natural number|numbers]] thereby becoming likely the first explicit advocate of [[structuralism]] in the philosophy of mathematics!

Maimon's lively account of his time and life (up to 1790) was edited by the German poet Karl Philipp Moritz and is a classical document of Jewish life and the epoch of enlightenment.

## Links

* [Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry Salomon Maimon](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/maimon/)

* [wikisource Salomon Maimon](https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Salomon_Maimon)


## Related entries

* [[transcendental grammar]]

* [[Critique of Pure Reason]]

* [[Immanuel Kant]]

* [[Stephan Wannowski]]

* [[Hermann Cohen]]

* [[structuralism]]


## References

* Zwi Batscha (ed.), _Salomon Maimons Lebensgeschichte von ihm selbst erzählt und herausgegeben von Karl Philipp Moritz_ , Jüdischer Verlag Frankfurt am Main 1995[1792].

* Meir Buzaglo, _Solomon Maimon - Monism, Skepticism, And Mathematics_ , University of Pittsburgh Press 2002.

* Friedrich Kuntze, _Salomon Maimons theoretische Philosophie und ihr Ort in einem System des Kritizismus_ , Logos **3** (1912) pp.285-308. ([digiZeit pdf](http://www.digizeitschriften.de/download/PPN51032052X_1912_0003/PPN51032052X_1912_0003___log40.pdf))

* Salomon Maimon, _Versuch über die Transzendentalphilosophie_ , Meiner Hamburg 2004[1790].

* Salomon Maimon, _Versuch einer neuen Logik oder Theorie des Denkens_ , Felisch Berlin 1794.




category:people