

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Quantum Field Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include AQFT and operator algebra contents]]
=--
#### Fields and quanta
+--{: .hide}
[[!include fields and quanta - table]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[nuclear physics]] ([[quantum chromodynamics]]) the _Cheshire cat principle_ ([NNZ 85](#NNZ85)) is the observation that in the [[quark bag model]] for [[confinement|confined]] [[quarks]] inside [[hadrons]] the [[radius]] of the "bag" is not actually [[observable]]. Hence the "bag" of the the bag model disappears, leaving only its [[confinement|confined]] content behind, whence the colorful term. 

From [Rho et al. 16](AdS-QCD#RhoEtAl16):

> One can make $[$[[chiral perturbation theory]]$]$ consistent with [[QCD]] by suitably matching the [[correlators]] of the [[effective field theory|effective theory]] to those of [[QCD]] at a [[scale]] near $\Lambda$. Clearly this procedure is not limited to only one set of [[vector mesons]]; in fact, one can readily generalize it to an infinite number of hidden [[gauge fields]] in an [[effective field theory|effective]] [[Lagrangian density|Lagrangian]]. In so doing, it turns out that a fifth dimension is "deconstructed" in a (4+1)-dimensional (or 5D) [[Yang-Mills theory|Yang–Mills]] type form. We will see in Part III that such a structure arises, [[top-down model building|top-down]], in [[string theory]].

> $[...]$

> $[$this [[holographic QCD]]$]$ model comes out to describe — unexpectedly well — low-energy properties of both [[mesons]] and [[baryons]], in particular those properties reliably described in quenched [[lattice QCD]] simulations.

> $[...]$

> One of the most noticeable results of this [[AdS/QCD|holographic model]] is the first derivation of vector dominance (VD) that holds both for mesons and for baryons. It has been
somewhat of an oddity and a puzzle that Sakurai’s [[vector meson dominance|vector dominance]] — with the lowest [[vector mesons]] [[rho meson|ρ]] and ω — which held very well for [[pion|pionic]] [[form factors]] at low momentum transfers famously failed for nucleon form factors. In this [[AdS/QCD|holographic model]], the [[vector meson dominance|VD]] comes out automatically for both the [[pion]] and the [[nucleon]] provided that the infinite $[$[[Kaluza-Klein mechanism|KK-]]$]$tower is included. While the [[vector meson dominance|VD]] for the [[pion]] with the infinite tower is not surprising given the successful Sakurai VD, that the [[vector meson dominance|VD]] holds also for the [[nucleons]] is highly nontrivial. $[...]$ It turns out to be a consequence of a [[AdS/QCD|holographic]] [[Cheshire cat principle|Cheshire Cat phenomenon]]

\linebreak

From [Nielsen-Zahed 09](Cheshire+cat+principle#NielsenZahed09):

> The [[Skyrmion]] is the ultimate [[soliton|topological]] [[quark bag model|bag model]] with zero size bag radius, lending further credence to the [[Cheshire cat principle]]. 


## Related concepts

* [[chiral perturbation theory]]

* [[quark bag model]]

* [[confinement]]

## References

Original article:

* {#NNZ85} S. Nadkarni, [[Holger Bech Nielsen]], [[Ismail Zahed]], _Bosonization Relations As Bag Boundary Conditions_, Nucl. Phys. B 253 (1985) 308 (<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(85)90533-4">doi:10.1016/0550-3213(85)90533-4</a>)

Further developments:

* [[Mannque Rho]], _Cheshire Cat Hadrons_, Phys. Rept. 240 (1994) 1-142 ([arXiv:hep-ph/9310300](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9310300), <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0370-1573(94)90002-7">doi:10.1016/0370-1573(94)90002-7</a>)

  updated as: _The Cheshire Cat Hadrons Revisited_ ([arXiv:hep-ph/0206003](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0206003))


Review:


* [[Mannque Rho]], Lecture I in: _Lectures on Effective Field Theories for Nuclei, Nuclear Matter and Dense Matter_, 2002 ([arXiv:nucl-th/0202078](https://arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/0202078), [cds:539674](https://cds.cern.ch/record/539674))

See also:

* [[Mannque Rho]], _Fractionalized Quasiparticles and the Hadron-Quark Duality in Dense Baryonic Matter_ ([arXiv:2004.09082](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.09082))

Derivation from the [[AdS/QCD correspondence]]:

* [[Holger Bech Nielsen]], [[Ismail Zahed]], _The Cheshire Cat Principle from Holography_ ([doi:10.1142/9789814280709_0017](https://doi.org/10.1142/9789814280709_0017), [arXiv:0904.0429](https://arxiv.org/abs/0904.0429)), Chapter 17 in: _[[The Multifaceted Skyrmion]]_, World Scientific 2016 ([doi:10.1142/9710](https://doi.org/10.1142/9710))