
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Topology
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Continuous maps
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A continuous map is a [[morphism]] in the category of [[topological spaces]] and in some similar contexts like [[locales]] and [[convergence spaces]].  (See also [[continuous space]].)


## Definitions

A [[function]] $f\colon X\to Y$ between [[topological spaces]] is a __continuous map__ (or is said to be *continuous*) if for every [[open subset]] $U \subset Y$, the [[preimage]] $f^{-1}(U)$ is open in $X$.

A function $f$ between [[convergence spaces]] is __continuous__ if for any filter $F$ such that $F \to x$, it follows that $f(F) \to f(x)$, where $f(F)$ is the filter generated by the filterbase $\{F(A) \;|\; A \in F\}$.

A __continuous map__ between [[locales]] is simply a [[frame]] [[homomorphism]] in the opposite direction.  Equivalently (via the [[adjoint functor theorem]]), it may be defined as a homomorphism of [[inflattices]] whose [[right adjoint]] preserves finitary [[meets]] (and hence is a frame homomorphism).


## Properties

Since continuity is defined in terms of *preservation of property* (namely preserving "openness" under preimages), it is natural to ask what other properties they preserve.  
Also, when a property is not always preserved it is useful to label those maps which do preserve it for closer study.


### Properties preserved

1. By definition, the preimage of an open set is open.
2. Similarly, the preimage of an [[closed set]] is closed.
3. The [[image]] of a [[connected space|connected subset]] is again connected.
4. The image of a [[compact space|compact subset]] is again compact.


### Special maps

1. The preimage of a compact set need not be compact; a continuous map for which this is true is known as a __[[proper map]]__.

2. The image of an open set need not be open; a continuous map for which this is true is said to be an __[[open map]]__.  (Technically, an open map is any [[function]] with just this property.)

3. The image of an closed set need not be closed; a continuous map for which this is true is said to be an __[[closed map]]__.  (Technically, a closed map is any function with just this property.)

4. A continuous map of topological spaces which is invertible as a function of sets is a __[[homeomorphism]]__ if the [[inverse function]] is a continuous map as well.


### Special cases in specific contexts

Although these don't make sense for arbitrary topological spaces (convergence spaces, locales, etc), they are special kinds of continuous maps in contexts such as [[metric spaces]]:

* [[uniformly continuous maps]],
* [[Lipschitz maps]],
* [[short maps]],
* [[differentiable maps]],
* [[smooth maps]].


## Related concepts

* [[degree of a continuous function]]

* [[equicontinuous family of functions]]

* [[analytic function]]

* [[smooth function]]

* [[convex function]]

[[!redirects continuous map]]
[[!redirects continuous maps]]
[[!redirects continuous function]]
[[!redirects continuous functions]]