
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Differential geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include synthetic differential geometry - contents]]
=--
#### Complex geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include complex geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

_Kähler manifolds_ are analogues in [[complex geometry]] of [[Riemannian manifolds]] in real [[differential geometry]].


Where a Riemannian manifold is a real [[smooth manifold]] equipped with a nondegenerate smooth symmetric 2-form $g$ (the [[Riemannian metric]]), an __almost Kähler manifold__ is a [[complex manifold|complex holomorphic manifold]] equipped with a nondegenerate hermitian 2-form $h$ (the __Kähler $2$-form__).  The real [[cotangent bundle]] is replaced with the complex cotangent bundle, and symmetry is replaced with hermitian symmetry. An almost Kähler manifold is a __Kähler manifold__ if it satisfies an additional integrability condition.

The Kähler 2-form can be decomposed as $h = g+i\omega$; here $g$ is a [[Riemannian metric]] and $\omega$ a [[symplectic form]]. 

## Examples

There is a unique up to a scalar hermitian metric on a complex projective space (which can be normalized), the Fubini--Study metric. All analytic subvarieties of a complex projective space are in fact [[algebraic variety|algebraic subvarieties]] and they inherit the Kähler structure from the projective space. Examples include complex tori $\mathbb{C}^n/L$ where $L$ is a lattice in $\mathbb{C}^n$, K3-surfaces, compact Calabi-Yau manifolds, quadrics, products of projective spaces and so on. 

## Properties

### Hodge structure
 {#HodgeStructure}

The [[Hodge theorem]] asserts that for a compact Kähler manifold, the canonical $(p,q)$-grading of its [[differential forms]] descends to its [[de Rham cohomology]]/[[ordinary cohomology]]. The resulting structure is called a _[[Hodge structure]]_, and is indeed the archetypical example of such.

## Related concepts

* **Kähler manifold**, [[hyper-Kähler manifold]], [[quaternionic Kähler manifold]]

* [[Kähler-Einstein manifold]]

[[!include special holonomy table]]

* [[symplectic manifold]]

* [[Kähler polarization]]

## References

Kähler manifolds were first introduced and studied by P. A. Shirokov (cf. [a historical article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1070/RM1995v050n02ABEH002098)) and later independently by Kähler. 

Lecture notes include

* Andrei Moroianu, _Lectures on Kähler Geometry_ ([pdf](http://www.math.polytechnique.fr/~moroianu/tex/kg.pdf))


[[!redirects Kähler manifolds]]

[[!redirects Kahler manifold]]
[[!redirects Kahler 2-form]]
[[!redirects almost Kahler manifold]]
[[!redirects Kähler 2-form]]
[[!redirects almost Kähler manifold]]

[[!redirects Kähler form]]
[[!redirects Kähler forms]]

[[!redirects Kähler geometry]]

[[!redirects Kähler manifold]]
