\tableofcontents

\section{Introduction}

An anabelioid is a category intended to play the role of a 'generalised geometric object' in algebraic/arithmetic geometry. Its definition is simple: a finite product of [[Galois category|Galois categories]], or in other words of [[classifying topos|classifying topoi]] of [[profinite group|profinite groups]]. The significance comes from the fact that in [[anabelian geometry]], an [[algebraic variety]] is essentially determined by its [[étale fundamental group|algebraic fundamental group]], which arises from a Galois category associated to the algebraic variety. The idea, due to [[Shinichi Mochizuki]], is that one can develop the geometry of these Galois categories themselves, and products of Galois categories in general; thus, develop a form of categorical algebraic geometry.  

To quote from Remark 1.1.4.1 of [Mochizuki2004](#Mochizuki2004):

> >_The introduction of anabelioids allows us to work with both "algebro-geometric anabelioids" (i.e., anabelioids arising from (anabelian) varieties) and "abstract anabelioids" (i.e., those which do not
necessarily arise from an (anabelian) variety) as geometric objects on
an equal footing.
_
>
>The reason that it is important to deal with "geometric objects" as opposed to groups, is that:
>
> > _We wish to study what happens as one **varies the basepoint** of one of these geometric objects._

\section{Details}

The following definitions follow [Mochizuki2004](#Mochizuki2004).

\begin{defn} A _connected anabelioid_ is exactly a [[Galois category]]. \end{defn}

\begin{defn} An _anabelioid_ is a category equivalent to a [[finite product]] of connected anabelioids, that is, to a finite product of Galois categories. \end{defn}

\begin{rmk} An anabelioid is also known as a _multi-Galois category_. \end{rmk}

\section{Associated notions}

* [[finite étale morphism of anabelioids]]

[[!redirects multi-Galois category]]

\section{References}

* {#Mochizuki2004} _The geometry of anabelioids_, [[Shinichi Mochizuki]], 2004, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci., 40, No. 3, 819-881. [paper](http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~motizuki/The%20Geometry%20of%20Anabelioids.pdf) [Zentralblatt review](https://zbmath.org/?q=an%3A1113.14021)