The term 'space' is quite generic and can mean many different things depending on context.  Often we will link it because we want to include many of these contexts at once!

Probably the default spaces are [[topological spaces]] (as defined by [[Bourbaki]]), with [[continuous maps]] between them.  There are many variants, from [[convergence spaces]] (general) to [[metric space|metric (metrisable) spaces]] (specific), all of which fall under the topic of [[topology]].  An important variation gives [[locales]]; many of the theorems from topology that require the [[axiom of choice]] for Bourbaki spaces become [[constructive mathematics|constructively]] valid for locales.

Often one restricts to [[nice topological spaces]] or to a [[nice category of spaces]]; these are not always the same kind of restriction!  There are many examples under those two headings; [[m-cofibrant spaces]] in particular allow one to identify [[homotopy equivalence]] with [[weak homotopy equivalence]].  More generally in [[homotopy theory]], one uses the [[homotopy hypothesis]] to identify spaces with $\infty$-[[infinity-groupoid|groupoids]], of which there are several models.  Since one common model is [[simplicial sets]], some homotopy theorists use "space" to mean "simplicial set."

Often one is also interested in spaces with additional structure.  For instance, smooth [[manifolds]] and [[generalized smooth spaces]] are spaces with smooth structure, and [[algebraic varieties]] and [[schemes]] are spaces with algebraic structure.  One can also speak more generally of spaces "modeled" on any suitable starting category; in this way one often comes to consider [[sheaves]] on a suitable [[site]] (and variations such as [[presheaves]], [[copresheaf|copresheaves]], or objects of an [[Isbell envelope]]) as spaces.  Generalized smooth spaces and schemes are two commonly encountered examples of spaces "modeled" on a starting category in this way.

One can also [[vertical categorification|categorify]] the concept of space.  As [[space and quantity|space is dual to quantity]], space and quantity can be [[categorification|categorified]] together; see $\infty$-[[infinity-space|space]] and compare $\infty$-[[infinity-quantity|quantity]].  Other types of categorified spaces include [[Grothendieck toposes]] (which are categorified locales) and [[stacks]] (which are categorified [[sheaves]]) and even their $\infty$-versions ($(\infty,1)$-[[(infinity,1)-topos|toposes]] and $\infty$-[[infinity-stack|stacks]]).

+-- {: .query}
[[Urs Schreiber]]: wait, the point of [[infinity-space]] is that this is precisely another way to look at what an [[infinity-stack]]. Can we reword the above sentence?

_Toby_:  Yeah, I\'m not sure what I meant by 'more abstract' there.
=--

[[!redirects spaces]]
