\tableofcontents

\section{Introduction}

_Gravity and grace_ is a collection of aphorisms written, probably without intent of publication, by Simone Weil, assembled by Gustav Thibon. It contains a chapter 'Algebra', which we reproduce below.

It is possible to read (part of) this as a criticism of [[formalism]] in mathematics, and as a musing on the importance of [[semantics]] ("the relation of the sign to the thing signified") in the [[foundations of mathematics]].

\section{Algebra}

The following is directly quoted from _Gravity and grace_.

> Money, mechanisation, algebra. The three monsters of contemporary civilisation. Complete analogy.
>
>Algebra and money are essentially levellers, the ﬁrst intellectually, the second eﬀectively.
>
>About ﬁfty years ago the life of the Provençal peasants ceased to
 be like that of the Greek peasants described by Hesiod. The
 destruction of science as conceived by the Greeks took place
 at about the same period. Money and algebra triumphed
 simultaneously.
>
>The relation of the sign to the thing signiﬁed is being destroyed,
 the game of exchanges between signs is being multiplied of
 itself and for itself. And the increasing complication demands
 that there should be signs for signs....
>
>Among the characteristics of the modern world we must not forget the impossibility of thinking in concrete terms of the
 relationship between eﬀort and the result of eﬀort. There are too
 many intermediaries. As in the other cases, this relationship
 which does not lie in any thought, lies in a thing: money.
>
>As collective thought cannot exist as thought, it passes into
 things (signs, machines...). Hence the paradox: it is the thing
 which thinks and the man who is reduced to the state of a thing.
>
>There is no collective thought. On the other hand our science is
 collective like our technics. Specialisation. We inherit not only
 results but methods which we do not understand. For the matter
 of that the two are inseparable, for the results of algebra provide
 methods for the other sciences.
>
>To make an inventory or criticism of our civilisation — what does
 that mean? To try to expose in precise terms the trap which has
 made man the slave of his own inventions. How has
 unconsciousness inﬁltrated itself into methodical thought and
 action? To escape by a return to the primitive state is a lazy
 solution. We have to rediscover the original pact between the
spirit and the world in this very civilisation of which we form a
 part. But it is a task which is beyond our power on account of the
 shortness of life and the impossibility of collaboration and of
 succession. That is no reason for not undertaking it. The situation of all of us is comparable to that of Socrates when he was
 awaiting death in his prison and began to learn to play the
 lyre....At any rate we shall have lived....
>
>The spirit, overcome by the weight of quantity, has no longer
 any other criterion than eﬃciency.
>
>Modern life is given over to immoderation. Immoderation
 invades everything: actions and thought, public and private life.
>
> The decadence of art is due to it. There is no more balance
 anywhere. The Catholic movement is to some extent in reaction
 against this; the Catholic ceremonies, at least, have remained
 intact. But then they are unrelated to the rest of existence.
>
>Capitalism has brought about the emancipation of collective
 humanity with respect to nature. But this collective humanity
 has itself taken on with respect to the individual the oppressive
 function formerly exercised by nature.
>
>This is true even with material things: ﬁre, water etc. The
 community has taken possession of all these natural forces.
>
>Question: can this emancipation, won by society, be
 transferred to the individual?

[[!redirects Gravity and grace]]