
### The open problem of confinement
 {#OpenProblemConfinementReferences}

While [[experiment]] as well as [[lattice gauge theory]]-computer simulation clearly show that [[confinement]] takes place, a real theoretical understanding has been missing (though [[AdS-QCD]] is now on a good track). This is the _confinement problem_. The same problem from the point of view of [[mathematics]] is called the _[[mass gap problem|mass gap]] [Millennium Problem](quantization+of+Yang-Mills+theory#ReferencesNonperturbativeTheoryAndMassGap)_. A related problem is the _[flavor problem](flavor+problem#TheFlavorProblem)_.

The following is a list of quotes highlighting the open problem of confinement:

\linebreak

* {#Witten79} [[Edward Witten]], _Baryons in the $1/n$ Expansion_, Nucl. Phys. B160 (1979) 57-115 ([spire:140391](http://inspirehep.net/record/140391), <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(79)90232-3">doi:10.1016/0550-3213(79)90232-3</a>)

> many of the essential  properties that the theory $[$QCD$]$ is presumed to have, including  confinement, dynamical mass generation, and chiral symmetry  breaking, are only poorly understood. And apart from the low-lying bound states of heavy quarks, which we believe can be  described by a nonrelativistic Schroedinger equation, we are unable to derive from the basic theory even the grossest  features of the partticle spectrum, or of traditional strong  interaction phenomenology

\linebreak

* {#Machleidt89} [[Rupert Machleidt]], _The Meson Theory of Nuclear Forces and Nuclear Structure_, In: Negele J.W., Vogt E. (eds.) _Advances in Nuclear Physics_ Advances in Nuclear Physics, vol 19. Springer 1989 ([doi:10.1007/978-1-4613-9907-0_2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4613-9907-0_2))

> There  are theoretical attempts to connect the fundamental theory of [[QCD]] with the very successful [[meson]] picture at low energy. The [[Skyrme model]] is an  example. In other attempts, one tries to derive the NN interaction more or less directly from [[QCD]].  At present, the predictions are more of a qualitative kind. For quantitative results, the one-[[pion]] and two-[[pion]] contributions have to be added by hand, as they do not emerge naturally out of [[QCD]]-inspired models. Knowing  that $\pi$ and $2\pi$ are the most important parts of the [[nuclear force]], this defect of present [[quark]] model calculations is serious.


\linebreak


* {#Kutschke96} Robert Kutschke, section 3.1 _Heavy flavour spectroscopy_, in D. Bugg (ed.), _Hadron Spectroscopy and the Confinement Problem_, Proceedings of a NATO Advanced Study Institute, Plenum Press 1996  ([doi:10.1007/978-1-4613-0375-6](https://www.springer.com/cn/book/9780306453038))

> While it is generally believed that QCD is the correct fundamental theory of the strong interactions there are, as yet, no practical means to produce full QCD calculations of hadron masses and their decay widths.

\linebreak

* {#Holstein99} Barry R. Holstein, _A Brief Introduction to Chiral Perturbation Theory_, Czech. J. Phys. 50S4:9-23, 2000 ([arXiv:hep-ph/9911449](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9911449))

> the holy grail sought by particle/nuclear knights has been to verify the correctness of the "ultimate" theory of strong interactions  -- quantum chromodynamics (QCD). 

> The theory is, of course, deceptively simple on the surface. $[...]$ So why are we still not satisfied? While at the very largest energies, asymptotic freedom allows the use of [[perturbative quantum field theory|perturbative techniques]], for those who are interested in making contact with low energy experimental findings there exist at least three fundamental difficulties:

> i) QCD is written in terms of the "wrong" degrees of freedom -- [[quarks]] and [[gluons]] -- while low energy experiments are performed with [[hadron|hadronic]] [[bound states]];

> ii) the theory is non-linear due to [[gluon]] self-[[interactions]];

> iii) the theory is one of strong coupling so that [[perturbative quantum field theory|perturbative methods]] are not practical


\linebreak


* {#CsakiReece06} Csaba Csaki, [[Matthew Reece]], _Toward a Systematic Holographic QCD: A Braneless Approach_, JHEP 0705:062, 2007 ([arxiv:hep-ph/0608266](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0608266))

  (in motivation of [[Ads/QCD]])

> QCD is a perennially problematic theory. Despite its decades of experimental support, the detailed low-energy physics remains beyond our calculational reach. The lattice provides a
technique for answering nonperturbative questions, but to date there remain open questions that have not been answered.

\linebreak

* {#Guidry08} Mike Guidry, _Gauge Field Theories: An Introduction with Applications_, Wiley 2008 ([ISBN:978-3-527-61736-4](https://www.wiley.com/en-us/Gauge+Field+Theories%3A+An+Introduction+with+Applications-p-9783527617364))

  Section 13.1.9:

> The holy grail of QCD is the proof that a color SU(3) gauge theory
confines in the non-perturbative regime. 

> This is not difficult to show for lattices with large spacing; unfortunately, such a demonstration does not constitute a proof of QCD confinement: to do that we must also demonstrate that the same theory that confines at large lattice spacing (strong coupling) has a continuum limit (weak coupling) that is consistent with the asymptotically free short distance behavior of QCD.


\linebreak

* {#Yi09} [[Piljin Yi]], _Holographic Baryons_ ([arXiv:0902.4515](https://arxiv.org/abs/0902.4515), [doi:10.1142/9789814280709_0016](https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/9789814280709_0016)), Chapter 16 in: [[Mannque Rho]], [[Ismail Zahed]] (eds.) _[[The Multifaceted Skyrmion]]_, World Scientific 2016 ([doi:10.1142/9710](https://doi.org/10.1142/9710))

> [[QCD]] is a challenging theory. Its most interesting aspects, namely the [[confinement]] of [[color charge|color]] and the [[chiral symmetry breaking]], have defied all analytical approaches. While there are now many data accumulated from the [[lattice gauge theory]], the methodology falls well short of giving us insights on how one may understand these phenomena analytically, nor does it give us a systematic way of obtaining a low energy theory of [[QCD]] below the [[confinement]] [[scale]]. 

\linebreak

* {#HashimotoIizukaYi10} [[Koji Hashimoto]], [[Norihiro Iizuka]], [[Piljin Yi]], _A Matrix Model for Baryons and Nuclear Forces_, JHEP 1010:003, 2010 ([arXiv:1003.4988](https://arxiv.org/abs/1003.4988))

> Nuclear physics is one of the oldest branches of high energy physics, yet remains one of more difficult. Despite the fact that we know the underlying fundamental theory, i.e. QCD, we are still unable to predict, reliably and analytically, behavior of nuclei or even a single proton. The problem is of course that one must understand the strong-coupling regime of QCD, which by and large remains inaccessible except by large-scale lattice simulations. Traditionally, this sets nuclear physics apart from the rest of high energy physics in many aspects. However, [[Witten-Sakai-Sugimoto model|recent developments]] in the so-called [[AdS-CFT|gauge/gravity duality]] began to solve certain strongly coupled field theories,possibly including QCD or its close relatives, allowing the two communities to merge with each other.


\linebreak


* {#Goldstein11} Jeff Greensite, _An Introduction to the Confinement Problem_, Lecture Notes in Physics, Volume 821, 2011 ([doi:10.1007/978-3-642-14382-3](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007%2F978-3-642-14382-3))

> Because of the great importance of the standard model, and the central role it plays in our understanding of particle physics, it is unfortunate that, in one very important respect, we don’t really understand how it works. The problem lies in the sector dealing with the interactions of quarks and gluons, the sector known as Quantum Chromodynamics or QCD. We simply do not know for sure why quarks and gluons, which are the fundamental fields of the theory, don’t show up in the actual spectrum of the theory, as asymptotic particle states. There is wide agreement  about  what  must  be  happening  in  high  energy  particle  collisions:  the  formation of color electric flux tubes among quarks and antiquarks, and the eventual fragmentation of those flux tubes into mesons and baryons, rather than free quarks and gluons. But there is no general agreement about why this is happening, and that limitation exposes our general ignorance about the workings of non-abelian gauge theories in general, and QCD in particular, at large distance scales.

\linebreak


* {#MachleidtEntem11} [[Rupert Machleidt]], [[David Rodríguez Entem]], _Chiral effective field theory and nuclear forces_, Phys. Rept. 503:1-75, 2011 ([arXiv:1105.2919](https://arxiv.org/abs/1105.2919), [doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2011.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2011.02.001))

> The problem with a derivation of [[nuclear forces]] from [[QCD]] is that this theory is [[non-perturbative QFT|non-perturbative]] in the low-energy regime characteristic of [[nuclear physics]], which makes direct solutions very difficult. Therefore, during the first round of new attempts, [[QCD]]-inspired [[quark]] models became popular. The positive aspect of these models is that they try to explain [[hadron]] structure and hadron-hadron [[interactions]] on an equal footing and, indeed, some of the gross features of the [[nucleon]]-[[nucleon]] interaction are explained successfully. 

> However, on a critical note, it must be pointed out that these quark-based approaches are nothing but another set of models and, thus, do not represent fundamental progress. For the purpose of describing hadron-hadron interactions, one may equally well stay with the simpler and much more quantitative [[meson]] models.



\linebreak


* {#Brambilla14} Brambilla et al., _[[QCD and strongly coupled gauge theories - challenges and perspectives]]_, Eur Phys J C Part Fields. 2014; 74(10): 2981 ([arXiv:1404.3723](https://arxiv.org/abs/1404.3723). [doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-014-2981-5](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1140%2Fepjc%2Fs10052-014-2981-5))

>  The success of the technique does not remove the challenge of understanding the non-perturbative aspects of the theory. The two aspects are
deeply intertwined. The Lagrangian of QCD is written in terms of quark and gluon degrees of freedom which become apparent at large energy but remain hidden inside hadrons in the low-energy regime. This confinement property is related to the increase of $\alpha_s$ at low energy, but it has never been
demonstrated analytically. 

> We have clear indications of the confinement of quarks into hadrons from both experiments and lattice QCD. Computations of the heavy quark–antiquark potential, for example, display a linear behavior in the quark–antiquark distance, which cannot be obtained in pure perturbation theory. Indeed the two main characteristics of QCD: confinement and the appearance of nearly massless pseudoscalar mesons, emergent from the spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry, are non-perturbative phenomena whose precise understanding continues to be a target of research. 

> Even in the simpler case of gluodynamics in the absence of quarks, we do not have a precise understanding of how a gap in the spectrum is formed and the glueball spectrum is generated.


\linebreak

* {#INFN15} [Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare](https://web.infn.it/csn1/index.php/en/), _What Next: White Paper of the INFN-CSN1_ _Proposal for a long term strategy for accelerator based experiments_, Frascati Phys.Ser. 60 (2015) 1-302 (2015-05-29) ([spire:1374543](http://inspirehep.net/record/1374543/), [pdf](http://www.lnf.infn.it/sis/frascatiseries/Volume60/Volume60.pdf) ) chapter 7: _Hadron Physics and non-perturbative QCD
_  ([pdf](http://www.infn.it/csn1/White_paper_documents/NPQCD.pdf))

> Experimentally, there is a large number of facts that lack a detailed qualitative and quantitative explanation. The most spectacular manifestation of our lack of theoretical understanding of QCD is the failure to observe the elementary degrees of freedom, quarks and gluons, as free asymptotic states (color con- finement) and the occurrence, instead, of families of massive mesons and baryons (hadrons) that form approximately linear Regge trajectories in the mass squared. The internal, partonic structure of hadrons, and nucleons in particular, is still largely mysterious. Since protons and neutrons form almost all the visible matter of the Universe, it is of basic importance to explore their static and dynamical properties in terms of quarks and gluons interacting according to QCD dynamics. 


\linebreak


* {#CobosMartinez16} J J Cobos-Martínez, _Non-perturbative QCD and hadron physics_ 2016  J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 761 012036 ([doi:10.1088/1742-6596/761/1/012036](http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-6596/761/1/012036))

> $[\cdots]$ the QCD Lagrangian does not by itself explain the data on strongly interacting matter, and it is not clear how the observed bound states, the hadrons, and their properties arise from QCD. Neither confinement  nor dynamical chiral symmetry breaking (DCSB) is apparent in QCD’s lagrangian, yet they play a dominant role in determining the observable characteristics of QCD. The physics of strongly interacting matter is governed by emergent phenomena such as these, which can only be elucidated through the use of non-perturbative methods in QCD [4, 5, 6, 7]

\linebreak


* {#SNM16} Hideo Suganuma, Yuya Nakagawa, Kohei Matsumoto, _1+1 Large $N_c$ QCD and its Holographic Dual -Soliton Picture of Baryons in Single-Flavor World_, Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Meson-Nucleon Physics and the Structure of the Nucleon (MENU2016) ([arxiv:1610.02074](https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.02074))

> Since 1973, quantum chromodynamics (QCD) has been established as the fundamental theory of the strong interaction. Nevertheless, it is very difficult to solve QCD directly in an analytical manner, and many effective models of QCD have been used instead of QCD, but most models cannot be derived from QCD and its connection to QCD is unclear. To analyze nonperturbative QCD, the lattice QCD Monte Carlo simulation has been also used as a first-principle calculation of the strong interaction. However, it has several weak points. For example, the state information (e.g. the wave function) is severely limited, because lattice QCD is based on the path-integral formalism. Also, it is difficult to take the chiral limit, because zero-mass pions require infinite volume lattices. There appears a notorious "sign problem" at finite density.

> On the other hand, [[holographic QCD]] has a direct connection to QCD, and can be derived from QCD in some limit. In fact, [[holographic QCD]] is equivalent to infrared QCD in large $N_c$ and strong 't Hooft coupling $\lambda$, via gauge/gravity correspondence. Remarkably, holographic QCD is successful to reproduce many hadron phenomenology such as [[vector meson dominance]], the KSRF relation, hidden local symmetry, the GSW model and the [[Skyrmion|Skyrme soliton]] picture. Unlike [[lattice QCD]] simulations, [[holographic QCD]] is usually formulated in the chiral limit, and does not have the sign problem at finite density.

\linebreak

* {#Petrov19} V. A. Petrov, _Asymptotic Regimes of Hadron Scattering in QCD_ ([arXiv:1901.02628](https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.02628))

> This is a commonplace that so far we do not have a full-fledged theory of interaction of [[hadrons]], derived from the first principles of [[QCD]] and having a regular way of calculating of hadronic [[scattering amplitude|amplitudes]], especially at high energies and small momentum transfers. The problem is related to a more general problem that QCD Lagrangian would yield [[confinement|colour confinement]] with massive
colourless physical states (hadrons).

\linebreak 

* {#HashimotoMatsuoMorita19} [[Koji Hashimoto]], [[Yoshinori Matsuo]], [[Takeshi Morita]], _Nuclear states and spectra in holographic QCD_, JHEP12 (2019) 001 ([arXiv:1902.07444](https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.07444))

> One of the long-standing problems in QCD is to reproduce profound nuclear physics. The strong coupling nature of QCD prevents us from solving it analytically, and even numerical simulations have a limitation such as the volume of the atomic nucleus versus the lattice size. It is quite important to bridge the particle physics and the nuclear physics, by solving QCD to derive typical fundamental notions of the nuclear physics, such as the magic numbers, the nuclear binding energy and the nuclear shell model. 

> [[holographic QCD|Holographic QCD]] is an analytic method to approach these problems in the strong coupling limit and at a large $N_c$. The [[nuclear matrix model]] is a many-body quantum effective mechanics for multiple baryons, derived by the [[AdS/CFT correspondence]] applied to QCD. 


\linebreak

* {#HKL19} Yonggoo Heo, C. Kobdaj, M.F.M. Lutz, _Constraints from a large-$N_c$ analysis on meson-baryon interactions at chiral order $Q^3$_, Phys. Rev. D 100, 094035 (2019) ([arXiv:1908.11816](https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.11816))

> Still after many decades of vigorous studies the outstanding challenge of modern physics
is to establish a rigorous link of QCD to low-energy hadron physics as it is observed in
the many experimental cross section measurements. 


\linebreak

* {#DHMMNVW19} Christian Drischler, Wick Haxton, Kenneth McElvain, Emanuele Mereghetti, Amy Nicholson, Pavlos Vranas, André Walker-Loud, _Towards grounding nuclear physics in QCD_ ([arxiv:1910.07961](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.07961))

> the entirety of the rich field of [[nuclear physics]] emerges from [[QCD]]: from the [[forces]] binding [[protons]] and [[neutrons]] into the nuclear landscape, to the fusion and fission reactions between [[atomic nucleus|nuclei]], to the prospective interactions of nuclei with BSM physics, and to the unknown [[phase of matter|state of matter]] at the cores of [[neutron stars]]. 

> How does this emergence take place exactly? How is the clustering of [[quarks]] into [[nucleons]] and [[alpha particles]] realized? What are the mechanisms behind collective phenomena in nuclei as strongly correlated many-body systems? How does the extreme fine-tuning required to reproduce nuclear binding energies proceed? – are big open questions in [[nuclear physics]].





\linebreak

* {#RobertsSchmidt20} [[Craig Roberts]], [[Sebastian M. Schmidt]], _Reflections upon the Emergence of Hadronic Mass_, The European Physical Journal Special Topics volume 229, pages 3319–3340 (2020) ([arXiv:2006.08782](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.08782), [doi:10.1140/epjst/e2020-000064-6](https://doi.org/10.1140/epjst/e2020-000064-6))

> More than 98% of visible mass is contained within [[atomic nuclei|nuclei]].  In first approximation, their atomic weights are simply the sum of the masses of all the [[neutrons]] and [[protons]] ([[nucleons]]) they contain.  Each nucleon has a [[mass]] $m_N \sim 1$ [[GeV]], i.e. approximately 2000-times the [[electron]] mass. The [[Higgs  boson]] produces the latter, but  what produces the masses of the neutron and proton?  This is the question posed above, which is pivotal to the development of modern physics: how can science explain the emergence of [[hadron|hadronic]] mass (EHM)? $[\cdots]$

> Modern science is thus encumbered with the fundamental problem of [[gluon]]  and [[quark]] [[confinement]]; and confinement is crucial because it ensures absolute stability of the [[proton]].  $[\cdots]$ Without confinement,our Universe cannot exist.

> As the 21st Century began, the Clay Mathematics Institute established seven Millennium Prize Problems. Each represents one of the toughest challenges in mathematics. The set contains the [[mass gap problem|problem of confinement]]; and  presenting a sound solution will win its discoverer 1,000,000 bucks. Even with  such motivation, today, almost fifty years after the discovery of [[quarks]], no rigorous solution has been found. Confinement and EHM are inextricably linked. Consequently, as  science plans for the next thirty  years, solving the problem of EHM has become a _grand challenge_. $[\cdots]$

> In trying to match [[QCD]] with Nature, one confronts the many complexities of strong, nonlinear dynamics in relativistic quantum field theory, e.g. the loss of particle number conservation, the frame and scale dependence of the  explanations and interpretations of observable processes, and the evolving character of the relevant degrees-of-freedom. [[electroweak field|Electroweak theory]] and phenomena are essentially [[perturbative quantum field theory|perturbative]]; hence, possess little of this complexity.  Science has never before encountered an [[interaction]] such as that at work in [[QCD]]. Understanding this interaction, explaining everything of which it is capable, can potentially change the way we look at the Universe.

\linebreak

* Michael Creutz, _QCD beyond diagrams_ ([arXiv:2010.04774](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.04774))

> QCD, the theory of the strong interactions, involves quarks interacting with non-Abelian gluon fields. This theory has many features that are difficult to impossible to see in conventional diagrammatic perturbation theory. This includes quark confinement, mass generation, and chiral symmetry breaking.

\linebreak

* {#Roberts21} [[Craig Roberts]], _On Mass and Matter_, AAPPS Bulletin volume 31, Article number: 6 (2021) ([arXiv:2101.08340](https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.08340), [doi:10.1007/s43673-021-00005-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s43673-021-00005-4))

> The origin of the proton mass, and with it the basic mass-scale for all nuclear physics, is one of the most profound puzzles in Nature. 

> Although QCD is defined by a seemingly simple Lagrangian, it specifies a problem that has defied solution for more than forty years. The key challenges in modern nuclear and high-energy physics are to reveal the observable content of strong QCD and, ultimately, therefrom derive the properties of nuclei. 


\linebreak

* [[Guy de Teramond]], [[Stanley Brodsky]], _Longitudinal dynamics and chiral symmetry breaking in holographic light-front QCD_ ([arXiv:2103.10950](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.10950))

> In spite of the important progress of Euclidean lattice gauge theory, a  basic  understanding  of  the  mechanism of  color  confinement and its  relation  to  chiral  symmetry breaking in QCD has remained an unsolved problem. 

> Recent [[holographic light front QCD|developments]] based on superconformal quantum mechanics in  light-front  quantization  and  its holographic  embedding on a higher  dimensional  gravity theory (gauge/gravity correspondence) have led to new analytic insights into the structure of hadrons and their  dynamics.

