
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

A __hyperstonean space__ (French: espace hyperstonien)
is a [[Stonean space]] such that the union of supports
of all normal measures is [[everywhere dense]].

A __normal measure__ is a [[Radon measure]] that vanishes
on [[nowhere dense]] subsets.

## Properties

The support of a normal measure is a [[clopen]] subset.

In a hyperstonean space, all [[meager subsets]] are [[nowhere dense]]
and the support of any normal measure is a [[clopen subset]].

Every [[Stonean space]] decomposes as a [[coproduct]] of three [[clopen subsets]] $E_1$, $E_2$, and $E_3$ with the following properties:

* $E_1$ has an [[everywhere dense]] [[meager subset]].  The only normal measure on $E_1$ is the zero measure.

* $E_2$ is a hyperstonean spaces.

* Every [[meager subset]] of $E_3$ is [[nowhere dense]] and every [[Radon measure]] has a [[nowhere dense]] support.  The only normal measure on $E_3$ is the zero measure.

By [[Gelfand-type duality for commutative von Neumann algebras]],
the category of hyperstonean spaces and open continuous maps
is equivalent to the opposite category of [[localizable Boolean algebras]],
the category of [[measurable locales]],
and the opposite category of commutative [[von Neumann algebras]].

## Hyperstonean locales

Hyperstonean locales can be defined as [[Stonean locales]]
that admit sufficiently many [[normal valuations]].

Assuming the [[axiom of choice]], [[Stonean locales]] are
[[spatial]], so the category of hyperstonean locales
is equivalent to the category of hyperstonean spaces.

## References

Hyperstonean spaces were introduced and studied by [[Jacques Dixmier]]:

* [[Jacques Dixmier]], _Sur certains espaces considérés par M. H. Stone_. Summa Brasiliensis Mathematicae 2, (1951), 151–182.  [PDF](https://dmitripavlov.org/scans/dixmier.pdf)

An expository account is given by [[Masamichi Takesaki]] in

* [[Masamichi Takesaki]], _Theory of Operator Algebras_, Chapter III, Section 1.

[[!redirects hyperstonean spaces]]
[[!redirects hyperstonean topological space]]
[[!redirects hyperstonean topological spaces]]
[[!redirects normal measure]]
[[!redirects normal measures]]
[[!redirects hyperstonean locale]]
[[!redirects hyperstonean locales]]
