
* [personal page](https://sites.google.com/view/cdroberts/home)

* [institute page](https://inp.nju.edu.cn/Members/Staff/20191017/i43996.html)


## Selected writings

On [[confinement]] and [[hadron]]-mass generation in [[QCD]] ([[mass gap problem]]):


* {#RobertsSchmidt20} [[Craig Roberts]], [[Sebastian M. Schmidt]], _Reflections upon the Emergence of Hadronic Mass_, The European Physical Journal Special Topics volume 229, pages 3319–3340 (2020) ([arXiv:2006.08782](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.08782), [doi:10.1140/epjst/e2020-000064-6](https://doi.org/10.1140/epjst/e2020-000064-6))


> More than 98% of visible mass is contained within [[atomic nuclei|nuclei]].  In first approximation, their atomic weights are simply the sum of the masses of all the [[neutrons]] and [[protons]] ([[nucleons]]) they contain.  Each nucleon has a [[mass]] $m_N \sim 1$ [[GeV]], i.e. approximately 2000-times the [[electron]] mass. The [[Higgs  boson]] produces the latter, but  what produces the masses of the neutron and proton?  This is the question posed above, which is pivotal to the development of modern physics: how can science explain the emergence of [[hadron|hadronic]] mass (EHM)? $[\cdots]$

> Modern science is thus encumbered with the fundamental problem of [[gluon]]  and [[quark]] [[confinement]]; and confinement is crucial because it ensures absolute stability of the [[proton]].  $[\cdots]$ Without confinement,our Universe cannot exist.

> As the 21st Century began, the Clay Mathematics Institute established seven Millennium Prize Problems [ [11](mass+gap#ReferencesMassGapProblem) ]. Each represents one of the toughest challenges in mathematics. The set contains the [[mass gap problem|problem of confinement]]; and  presenting a sound solution will win its discoverer 1,000,000 bucks. Even with  such motivation, today, almost fifty years after the discovery of [[quarks]] [12–14], no rigorous solution has been found. Confinement and EHM are inextricably linked. Consequently, as  science plans for the next thirty  years, solving the problem of EHM has become a _grand challenge_. $[\cdots]$

> In trying to match [[QCD]] with Nature, one confronts the many complexities of strong, nonlinear dynamics in relativistic quantum field theory, e.g. the loss of particle number conservation, the frame and scale dependence of the  explanations and interpretations of observable processes, and the evolving character of the relevant degrees-of-freedom. [[electroweak field|Electroweak theory]] and phenomena are essentially [[perturbative quantum field theory|perturbative]]; hence, possess little of this complexity.  Science has never before encountered an [[interaction]] such as that at work in [[QCD]]. Understanding this interaction, explaining everything of which it is capable, can potentially change the way we look at the Universe.

* [[Craig Roberts]], _On Mass and Matter_, AAPPS Bulletin volume 31, Article number: 6 (2021) ([arXiv:2101.08340](https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.08340), [doi:10.1007/s43673-021-00005-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s43673-021-00005-4))



category: people
