
# Generalized polycategories

* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A *generalized polycategory* combines the notion of [[generalized multicategory]] with that of [[polycategory]] (or [[prop]]).  While a generalized multicategory is parametrized by a [[monad]] (on a [[double category]] or [[bicategory]] or [[virtual double category]]) that specifies the arities of domains of morphisms, a generalized polycategory is parametrized by *two* such monads, specifying the arities of domains and codomains, together with a suitable sort of [[distributive law]] between them that specifies the allowable composites.

The theory of generalized polycategories is very underdeveloped in the literature compared to generalized multicategories.  A Burroni-Leinster style definition, using a double category of spans only, appears in [Koslowski 2005](#Koslowski), and is used to define planar (non-symmetric) polycategories.  A definition using profunctors is implicit in [Garner 2008](#Garner), and is used to define symmetric polycategories.  But no general framework, or other examples, appears to have been written down yet.

## References

* {#Koslowski} Juergen Koslowski, *A monadic approach to polycategories*, [TAC](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/14/7/14-07abs.html) Vol. 14, 2005, No. 7, pp 125-156.

* {#Garner} [[Richard Garner]], *Polycategories via pseudo-distributive laws*, [arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0606735), Adv. Math. 218 no. 3 (2008)

[[!redirects generalized polycategories]]
[[!redirects generalized prop]]
[[!redirects generalized props]]
[[!redirects generalized PROP]]
[[!redirects generalized PROPs]]
