pages/2169.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


# Normed division algebras
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A normed division algebra is an [[associative algebra]] (over some [[ground field]]) that is both a [[division algebra]] as well as a multiplicatively [[normed algebra]]. 

It turns out that over the [[real numbers]] there are precisely only four normed division algebras up to [[isomorphism]]: the algebras of 

1. [[real numbers]], 

1. [[complex numbers]], 

1. [[quaternions]], 

1. [[octonions]].

In this sense real normed division algebras may be thought of as a natural generalization of the more familiar real and complex numbers. 

This classification turns out to closely connect to various other systems of exceptional structures in [[mathematics]] and [[physics]]: 

* The _[[Hopf invariant one theorem]]_ says that the only [[continuous functions]] between [[spheres]] of the form $S^{2n-1}\to S^n$ whose [[Hopf invariant]] is equal to 1 are the [[Hopf constructions]] on the four real normed division algebras, namely 

   1. the [[real Hopf fibration]];

   1. the [[complex Hopf fibration]];

   1. the [[quaternionic Hopf fibration]];

   1. the [[octonionic Hopf fibration]].

* Patterns related to [[Majorana spinors]] in [[spin geometry]] are intimately related to the four normed division algebras, and, induced by this, so is the classification of _[[supersymmetry]]_in the form of [[super Poincaré Lie algebras]] and [[super Minkowski spacetimes]] (which are built from these real spin representations). For more on this see at _[[supersymmetry and division algebras]]_.

(Moreover, apparently these two items are not unrelated, see [[schreiber:Equivariant cohomology of M2/M5-branes|here]]).


## Definition

A __normed division algebra__ is 

* a [[division algebra]];

* that is also a [[Banach algebra]].

While the [[norm]] in a [[Banach algebra]] is in general only submultiplicative (${\|x y\|} \leq {\|x\|} {\|y\|}$), the norm in a normed division algebra must be multiplicative (${\|x y\|} = {\|x\|} {\|y\|}$).  Accordingly, this norm is considered to be an [[absolute value]] 
and often written ${|{-}|}$ instead of ${\|{-}\|}$.  There is also a converse: if the norm on a Banach algebra is multiplicative (including ${\|1\|} = 1$), then it must be a division algebra.  While the term 'normed division algebra' does not seem to include the [[complete space|completeness]] condition of a Banach algebra, in fact the only examples have finite [[dimension]] and are therefore complete.

Accordingly, a normed division algebras is in particular a division [[composition algebra]].



## Properties

### Classification

Over the [[complex numbers]],  [[generalized the|the]] only normed division algebra is the algebra of complex numbers themselves.  

The [[Hurwitz theorem]] says that over the [[real numbers]] there are, up to [[isomorphism]], exactly four finite-dimensional normed division algebras :

*  $\mathbb{R}$, the algebra of [[real numbers]],
*  $\mathbb{C}$, the algebra of [[complex numbers]],
*  $\mathbb{H}$, the algebra of [[quaternions]],
*  $\mathbb{O}$, the algebra of [[octonions]].

Each of these is produced from the previous one by the [[Cayley–Dickson construction]]; when applied to $\mathbb{O}$, this construction produces the algebra of [[sedenions]], which do *not* form a division algebra.

The Cayley--Dickson construction applies to an algebra with [[involution]]; by the abstract nonsense of that construction, we can see that the four normed division algebras above have these properties:

*  $\mathbb{R}$ is [[associative algebra|associative]], [[commutative algebra|commutative]], and with trivial involution,
*  $\mathbb{C}$ is associative and commutative but has nontrivial involution,
*  $\mathbb{H}$ is associative but noncommutative and with nontrivial involution,
*  $\mathbb{O}$ is neither associative, commutative, nor with trivial involution.

However, these algebras do all have some useful algebraic properties; in particular, they are all [[alternative algebra|alternative]] (a weak version of associativity).  They are also all [[composition algebra]]s.

A __[[normed field]]__ is a commutative normed division algebra; it follows from the preceding that the only normed fields over $\mathbb{R}$ are $\mathbb{R}$ and $\mathbb{C}$ (e.g. [Tornheim 52](#Tornheim52)).

### Automorphisms
 {#Automorphisms}

The [[automorphism groups]] of the real normed division algebras, as [[normed algebras]], are

* $Aut(\mathbb{R}) = 1$, the [[trivial group]]

* $Aut(\mathbb{C}) = \mathbb{Z}/2$ the [[group of order 2]], acting by [[complex conjugation]];

* $Aut(\mathbb{H}) = SO(3)$, the [[special orthogonal group]] acting via its canonical representaiton  on the 3-dimensional space of imaginary octonions;

* $Aut(\mathbb{O}) = G_2$, the [[exceptional Lie group]] [[G2]].
 
## Related concepts

* [[Hopf invariant one]]

[[!include exceptional spinors and division algebras -- table]]

see [[division algebra and supersymmetry]]

## References


The classification of real divsion composition algebras is originally due ([[Hurwitz theorem]]) to 

* {#Hurwitz1898} [[Adolf Hurwitz]], _Über die Composition der quadratischen Formen von beliebig vielen Variabeln_, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Göttingen (1898) 309–316

General discussion includes includes

* {#Tornheim52} Leonard Tornheim, _Normed fields over the real and complex fields_, Michigan Math. J. Volume 1, Issue 1 (1952), 61-68. ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.mmj/1028989727))

* Silvio Aurora, _On normed rings with monotone multiplication_, Pacific J. Math.
Volume 33, Number 1 (1970), 15-20 ([JSTOR](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.pjm/1102977236))



Exposition with emphasis on the [[octonions]] is in

* [[John Baez]], _[Normed Division Algebras](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/octonions/node2.html)_

* [[John Baez]], [This Week's Finds --- Week 59](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/week59.html)

Discussion of [[Riemannian geometry]] and [[special holonomy]] modeled on the different normed division algebras is in

* {#Leung02} [[Naichung Conan Leung]], _Riemannian Geometry Over Different Normed Division Algebras_, J. Differential Geom. Volume 61, Number 2 (2002), 289-333. ([publisher page](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.jdg/1090351387))



[[!redirects normed division algebra]]
[[!redirects normed division algebras]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 104649 Revision date: 2016-01-22 13:31:06 Page name: normed division algebra Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 195.37.209.180

pages/2169.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


# Normed division algebras
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A normed division algebra is an [[associative algebra]] (over some [[ground field]]) that is both a [[division algebra]] as well as a multiplicatively [[normed algebra]]. 

It turns out that over the [[real numbers]] there are precisely only four normed division algebras up to [[isomorphism]]: the algebras of 

1. [[real numbers]], 

1. [[complex numbers]], 

1. [[quaternions]], 

1. [[octonions]].

In this sense real normed division algebras may be thought of as a natural generalization of the more familiar real and complex numbers. 

This classification turns out to closely connect to various other systems of exceptional structures in [[mathematics]] and [[physics]]: 

* The _[[Hopf invariant one theorem]]_ says that the only [[continuous functions]] between [[spheres]] of the form $S^{2n-1}\to S^n$ whose [[Hopf invariant]] is equal to 1 are the [[Hopf constructions]] on the four real normed division algebras, namely 

   1. the [[real Hopf fibration]];

   1. the [[complex Hopf fibration]];

   1. the [[quaternionic Hopf fibration]];

   1. the [[octonionic Hopf fibration]].

* Patterns related to [[Majorana spinors]] in [[spin geometry]] are intimately related to the four normed division algebras, and, induced by this, so is the classification of _[[supersymmetry]]_in the form of [[super Poincaré Lie algebras]] and [[super Minkowski spacetimes]] (which are built from these real spin representations). For more on this see at _[[supersymmetry and division algebras]]_.

(Moreover, apparently these two items are not unrelated, see [[schreiber:Equivariant cohomology of M2/M5-branes|here]]).


## Definition

A __normed division algebra__ is 

* a [[division algebra]];

* that is also a [[Banach algebra]].

While the [[norm]] in a [[Banach algebra]] is in general only submultiplicative (${\|x y\|} \leq {\|x\|} {\|y\|}$), the norm in a normed division algebra must be multiplicative (${\|x y\|} = {\|x\|} {\|y\|}$).  Accordingly, this norm is considered to be an [[absolute value]] 
and often written ${|{-}|}$ instead of ${\|{-}\|}$.  There is also a converse: if the norm on a Banach algebra is multiplicative (including ${\|1\|} = 1$), then it must be a division algebra.  While the term 'normed division algebra' does not seem to include the [[complete space|completeness]] condition of a Banach algebra, in fact the only examples have finite [[dimension]] and are therefore complete.

Accordingly, a normed division algebras is in particular a division [[composition algebra]].



## Properties

### Classification

Over the [[complex numbers]],  [[generalized the|the]] only normed division algebra is the algebra of complex numbers themselves.  

The [[Hurwitz theorem]] says that over the [[real numbers]] there are, up to [[isomorphism]], exactly four finite-dimensional normed division algebras :

*  $\mathbb{R}$, the algebra of [[real numbers]],
*  $\mathbb{C}$, the algebra of [[complex numbers]],
*  $\mathbb{H}$, the algebra of [[quaternions]],
*  $\mathbb{O}$, the algebra of [[octonions]].

Each of these is produced from the previous one by the [[Cayley–Dickson construction]]; when applied to $\mathbb{O}$, this construction produces the algebra of [[sedenions]], which do *not* form a division algebra.

The Cayley--Dickson construction applies to an algebra with [[involution]]; by the abstract nonsense of that construction, we can see that the four normed division algebras above have these properties:

*  $\mathbb{R}$ is [[associative algebra|associative]], [[commutative algebra|commutative]], and with trivial involution,
*  $\mathbb{C}$ is associative and commutative but has nontrivial involution,
*  $\mathbb{H}$ is associative but noncommutative and with nontrivial involution,
*  $\mathbb{O}$ is neither associative, commutative, nor with trivial involution.

However, these algebras do all have some useful algebraic properties; in particular, they are all [[alternative algebra|alternative]] (a weak version of associativity).  They are also all [[composition algebra]]s.

A __[[normed field]]__ is a commutative normed division algebra; it follows from the preceding that the only normed fields over $\mathbb{R}$ are $\mathbb{R}$ and $\mathbb{C}$ (e.g. [Tornheim 52](#Tornheim52)).

### Automorphisms
 {#Automorphisms}

The [[automorphism groups]] of the real normed division algebras, as [[normed algebras]], are

* $Aut(\mathbb{R}) = 1$, the [[trivial group]]

* $Aut(\mathbb{C}) = \mathbb{Z}/2$ the [[group of order 2]], acting by [[complex conjugation]];

* $Aut(\mathbb{H}) = SO(3)$, the [[special orthogonal group]] acting via its canonical representaiton  on the 3-dimensional space of imaginary octonions;

* $Aut(\mathbb{O}) = G_2$, the [[exceptional Lie group]] [[G2]].

### Relation to H-space structures on sphere (Hopf invariant one)

The [[Hopf invariant one theorem]] says that the [[spheres]] carrying [[H-space]] structure are precisely the unit spheres in one of the normed division algebras

<img src="http://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/AdamsHopfInvariantProofFlow.jpg" width="700">

([Adams 60](Hopf+invariant+one#Adams60))
 
## Related concepts

* [[Hopf invariant one]]

[[!include exceptional spinors and division algebras -- table]]

see [[division algebra and supersymmetry]]

[[!include normed division algebra Riemannian geometry -- table]]

## References


The classification of real divsion composition algebras is originally due ([[Hurwitz theorem]]) to 

* {#Hurwitz1898} [[Adolf Hurwitz]], _Über die Composition der quadratischen Formen von beliebig vielen Variabeln_, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Göttingen (1898) 309–316

General discussion includes includes

* {#Tornheim52} Leonard Tornheim, _Normed fields over the real and complex fields_, Michigan Math. J. Volume 1, Issue 1 (1952), 61-68. ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.mmj/1028989727))

* Silvio Aurora, _On normed rings with monotone multiplication_, Pacific J. Math.
Volume 33, Number 1 (1970), 15-20 ([JSTOR](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.pjm/1102977236))



Exposition with emphasis on the [[octonions]] is in

* [[John Baez]], _[Normed Division Algebras](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/octonions/node2.html)_

* [[John Baez]], [This Week's Finds --- Week 59](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/week59.html)

Discussion of [[Riemannian geometry]] and [[special holonomy]] modeled on the different normed division algebras is in

* {#Leung02} [[Naichung Conan Leung]], _Riemannian Geometry Over Different Normed Division Algebras_, J. Differential Geom. Volume 61, Number 2 (2002), 289-333. ([publisher page](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.jdg/1090351387))



[[!redirects normed division algebra]]
[[!redirects normed division algebras]]
