
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebraic topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include algebraic topology - contents]]
=--
#### Cobordism theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cobordism theory -- contents]]
=--
=--
=--


This page compiles material related to the book

* [[Pierre Conner]], [[Edwin Floyd]], 

  **The Relation of Cobordism to K-Theories**, 

  Lecture Notes in Mathematics __28__ Springer 1966 

  [doi:10.1007/BFb0071091](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/BFb0071091),

  [MR216511](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=216511)

on [[cobordism theory]] and [[topological K-theory]], meeting in the notion of the [[e-invariant]].


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## The Thom Isomorphism in K-theory

* [[Thom isomorphism]]

* [[topological K-theory]]

### 1. Exterior algebra

* [[exterior algebra]]

### 2. Tensor products of exterior algebras

### 3. Application to bundles

### 4. Thom classes of line bundles

* [[projective spaces]], in particular [[quaternionic projective space]]

* [[tautological line bundle]]

* [[Thom class]]

* [[Whitehead-generalized cohomology theory]]

* [[multiplicative cohomology theory]]

### 5. Cobordism and homomorphism into K-theory

* [[cobordism cohomology theory]]

* [[MFr]]$\to$[[MSp]]$\to$[[MSU]]$\to$[[MU]]

* [[Conner-Floyd orientation]] 

### 6. The homomorphism $\mu_c$

* [[Thom isomorphism]]

* [[rational Todd class is Chern character of Thom class]]

## Cobordism Characteristic Classes

### 7. A theorem of Dold

* [[Leray-Hirsch theorem]]

* [[quaternionic oriented cohomology]], [[complex oriented cohomology]]

* [[Conner-Floyd Chern classes]]


### 8. Characteristic classes on cobordism

* [[MSp]]

* [[Conner-Floyd Chern class]]

### 9. Characteristic classes in K-theory

* [[Chern classes]]

* [[Chern character]]

### 10. A cobordism interpretation for $K^\ast(X)$

* [[Conner-Floyd isomorphism]]

  ([[Landweber exact functor theorem]] for [[KU]] and [[KSp]], see also _[[cobordism theory determining homology theory]]_)

  


### 11. Mappings into spheres

## $U$-Manifolds with Framed Boundaries

### 12. The $U$-bordism groups $\Omega^U_\bullet$

* [[MU]]

### 13. Characteristic numbers from K-theory

* [[Todd class]]

* [[Todd genus]]

### 14. The theorem of Stong and Hattori

### 15. $U$-Manifolds with stably framed boundaries

### 16. The bordism groups $\Omega^{U,fr}_\bullet$

* [[manifold with boundary]]

* [[MUFr]], [[(U,fr)-manifolds]]

* [[rational Todd class is Chern character of Thom class]]

* [[e-invariant]]

* [[e-invariant is Todd class of cobounding (U,fr)-manifold]]


### 17. The groups $\Omega^{\mathrm{U}, SU}_\bullet$

### 18. The image of $\Omega^{fr}_{\bullet}$ in $\Omega^{SU}_\bullet$





category: reference