

* Zhengfeng Ji, Anand Natarajan, Thomas Vidick, John Wright, Henry Yuen, _MIP${}^\ast$=RE_ ([arxiv/2001.04383](https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.04383))

> We show that the class MIP* of languages that can be decided by a classical verifier interacting with multiple all-powerful quantum provers sharing entanglement is equal to the class RE of recursively enumerable languages. 
 Our proof builds upon the quantum low-degree test of (Natarajan and Vidick, FOCS 2018) and the classical low-individual degree test of (Ji, et al., 2020) by integrating recent developments from (Natarajan and Wright, FOCS 2019) and combining them with the recursive compression framework of (Fitzsimons et al., STOC 2019).

> An immediate byproduct of our result is that there is an efficient reduction from the Halting Problem to the problem of deciding whether a two-player nonlocal game has entangled value 1 or at most 1/2. Using a known connection, undecidability of the entangled value implies a negative answer to Tsirelson's problem: we show, by providing an explicit example, that the closure Cqa of the set of quantum tensor product correlations is strictly included in the set Cqc of quantum commuting correlations. Following work of (Fritz, Rev. Math. Phys. 2012) and (Junge et al., J. Math. Phys. 2011) our results provide a refutation of [[Connes' embedding conjecture]] from the theory of von Neumann algebras. 

* Henry Yuen, _A tale of turing machines, quantum-entangled particles, and operator algebras_,   [yt]() zoom presentation