
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _quaternionic projective plane_ $\mathbb{H}P^2$ is the [[projective plane]] over the [[skew-field]] of [[quaternions]].

## Properties

### As a quaternion-Kähler manifold / Wolf space

The quaternionic projective plane $\mathbb{H}P^2$ the first of the list of examples  of spaces that are both [[quaternion-Kähler manifolds]] as well as [[symmetric spaces]], called _[[Wolf spaces]]_.


### AKM-Theorem

In higher dimensional analogy to the [[Arnold-Kuiper-Massey theorem]] identifying the [[quotient space|quotient]] of the [[complex projective plane]] by its [[finite group of order 2|O(1)]]-action as the [[4-sphere]], we have:

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition
**(quaternionic [[AKM-theorem]])**

The [[7-sphere]] is the [[quotient space]] of the (right-)[[quaternionic projective plane]] by the left multiplication [[action]] by [[U(1)]] $\subset$ [[Sp(1)]]:

$$
  \mathbb{H}P^2 / \mathrm{U}(1)
  \simeq
  S^7
$$

=--

([Arnold 99](#Arnold99), [Atiyah-Witten 01, Sec. 5.5](#AtiyahWitten01))

## Related concepts

* [[quaternionic projective space]]

  * [[quaternionic projective line]]

* [[real projective plane]]

* [[complex projective plane]]

* [[octonionic projective plane]]

## References

* {#Arnold99} [[Vladimir Arnold]], _Relatives of the Quotient of the Complex Projective Plane by the Complex Conjugation_, Tr. Mat. Inst. Steklova, 1999, Volume 224, Pages 56–67; English translation: Proceedings of the Steklov Institute of Mathematics, 1999, 224, 46–56 ([mathnet:tm691](http://mi.mathnet.ru/eng/tm691))



{#AtiyahWitten01} [[M-theory on 8-manifolds|M-theory on the 8-manifold]] $\mathbb{H}P2$, hence on a [[quaternion-Kähler manifold]] of dimension 8 with [[holonomy]] [[Sp(2).Sp(1)]], is considered in

* [[Michael Atiyah]], [[Edward Witten]], p. 75 onwards in  _$M$-Theory dynamics on a manifold of $G_2$-holonomy_, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 6 (2001) ([arXiv:hep-th/0107177](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0107177))

and argued to be [[duality in string theory|dual]] to [[M-theory on G2-manifolds]] in three different ways, which in turn is argued to lead to a a possible [[proof]] of [[confinement]] in the resulting 4d [[effective field theory]] (see [there](M-theory+on+G2-manifolds#Confinement) for more).




[[!redirects HP^2]]
[[!redirects HP2]]



