[[!include all changes]]

All non-trivial additions or changes to the $n$Lab should briefly be indicated here. This way [[Contributors|the rest of us]] can spot them, so we can learn what you know --- and maybe make further improvements!

+-- {: .standout}

Please log all your non-trivial changes to the $n$Lab here!

=--

Here "non-trivial" means: anything that any other contributor might be interested in taking notice of. If you fix a trivial typo in the text somewhere, that is highly appreciated but unlikely to be controversial and hence need not be logged here. But already if you fix a typo in some _formula_, it may be of interest. Generally: the more you log your activity here, the better. Even when in doubt whether anyone else might be interested in changes you made, drop a note here on what you did.

The importance of logging changes here is that

+-- {: .standout}

Logging changes here is the way to allow collaboration on the $n$Lab without everybody following every individual page.

=--

Contributions that are not logged here are likely to be missed and ignored. And that can't be the point of making a contribution. 

These comments should go in _reverse_ chronological order, so that the latest are on top of the list. To keep the list international, use the date in **UTC** (the date given by the server for your edits).  However, regardless of that, be sure to **add new comments to the top** of the list.

***


## 2009-09-01
* [[Zoran Škoda]]: of course, this is not a solution to the database problem, but I anyway think the discussion part could be separated from the main table of _Timeline_ and the _Timeline_ could have a separate part till 1960 say, then 1960 till 1989 and then third since 1990 (for example, better estimates possible). That would be easier for editing, with big file it is difficult to scroll when editing anyway. I created [[normalizer]], [[center]] (with a word on and redirect [[centralizer]]) and [[holomorph]]. Please check, it is elementary, but it was a quick writing. 

* [[Andrew Stacey]] is seriously considering finding The Doctor and borrowing the Tardis to go back and have a Serious Word with the designers of sqlite3.  (Anyone who gets the reference, I have a great photograph of a bus seen here in Trondheim that proves that The Doctor's greatest enemies are sneakily planning their next invasion from Norway.  But I digress.)  The problem with the timeline is the same as that with the long page names (and with an old problem in the testing stage with stylesheets).  It's down to a fundamental difference in design between sqlite3 (the old, slow database backend) and mysql (the newer, snappier model).  Basically, while both allow you to declare certain entries to be a certain type, sqlite3 then proceeds to __ignore that type__.  Mysql (and just about every other database) enforces it.  So when Instiki says "page names should be at most 60 chars long", Mysql truncates them to 60 chars while sqlite3 merrily accepts page names as long as Lanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwyrndrobwllllantysiliogogogoch and back again.  Twice.  Similarly, where MySQL has a limit on lengths of rows in its database (happens to be 65535 bytes), sqlite3 merrily goes on accepting data as long as it gets it.

  You can see where this is going, can't you.  Yup, timeline hit that latter limit.  It's currently over 80000 _characters_, and some of those are unicode so I've no idea how many actual bytes it is!

  Before anyone suggests going back to sqlite3, let me point out that we can't scale up with sqlite3.  So that's a non-starter.  There are complicated possibilities in which we have more than one row for a page, but the absolute simplest would be to split long pages into smaller ones and then include them from the main one.  So we could split the timeline into, say, decades and then an extra bit for the discussion and simply include them all on the main timeline page.  That would also make editing the page a bit slicker and quicker.

  If that is acceptable, then I can load up the timeline in two segments for someone to carve up into more sensible pieces.  It'll be tomorrow now before I get round to doing this (sorry).

  I'll also have to figure out whether any more pages are affected by this.  I'm afraid that I'll have to roll these back to how they were when the lab was migrated (but presumably no-one's actually tried to edit one of these truncated pages, otherwise there'd've been more bugs noted here).

* [[Todd Trimble]] added a teeny bit to [[locally convex topological vector space]]. I hope to be more in nLab editor mode soon. Congratulations on a successful migration (with big thanks to [[Andrew Stacey]]). 

  [[Andrew Stacey]]: I'd hold off on the champagne for a little bit ...

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: query in [[category theory]]: I think that blaming the terminology *abstract nonsense* to predominantly non-likers is misleading and that the wikipedia is this time more correct than nlab. 

  * [[Jon Awbrey]]: I have always understood the term "abstract nonsense" as a pun on the sense of the word "sense" that means "direction" --- hence "abstract nonsense" suggests something like the "formal path-independence" of commutative diagrams.  I'm sure I mentioned this to several people back in the day, and they all said something like, "well, duh."

  * [[Zoran Škoda]]: I never heard of such interpretation; plus this interpretation would not survive in other languages like Russian and French where the direction and sense/nonsense do not mix like that. Russian version of *abstract nonsense* is абстрактная чепуха. 

* [[Jon Awbrey]] added stubs and links at [[sign relation]] and [[triadic relation]].

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: replied in the discussion at the bottom of [[category theory]] -- and have a question

* [[Urs Schreiber]]  WATCH OUT WITH LONG ENTRY NAMES -- see the $n$forum discussion. Some long entry names got truncated in the migration. the entry "Chevalley-eilenberg algebra in synthetic differential geometry" for instance is now called [[Chevalley-Eilenberg algebra in synthetic differential geomet]]

 See "all pages" to find out the truncated entry name of an entry that you know should be there but is missing. 


* [[Rafael Borowiecki]]: To [[Andrew Stacey]]. The whole bottom part of the page [[Timeline of category theory and related mathematics]] is abruptly missing. Which is a lot, not only my question. Since i have the full version loaded in a browser i could try to reconstruct it but i would prefer if you did a rollback if you can.

* [[Jon Awbrey]] added content to [[hypostatic abstraction]].

* [[John Baez]]: 

  * answered Rafael's plea for a definition of 'CW complex' in that big discussion on [[category theory]], and also commented on Urs' remark about 'simplicial complexes';

  * completed the definition of [[monoidal category]] by adding the triangle equation;
  
  * added some remarks on right vs. left duals on [[rigid monoidal category]];

  * noted that the $n$Lab crashed a couple of times while I was doing this.  Unfortunately I did not get a screenshot of the fancy error message.

    [[Andrew Stacey]]: Yes, we hit our memory ceiling a couple of times.  I've lowered a couple of settings to try to ensure that we don't do this again but it's a bit experimental as to what the best settings are.  It's all a bit of a learning experience for me!  (Perhaps I shouldn't admit to that ...)

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: I restarted the system and now IE renders [[normal subgroup]] correctly. This is strange as it had problems only with new entries [[normal subgroup]] and [[normal closure]] (even after many reloads) and rendered correctly the other entries. Now after reboot even they appear correct. 

  [[Andrew Stacey]]: Okay, sounds like it was a cache bug.  During the changeover, various addresses pointed all over the shop and there are redirects going all ways from Sunday, so it's not surprising that a browser get confused.  Clearing caches is probably a good idea.  It will take a while before ncatlab.org properly points here for everyone (for example, from my work machine it was working from about midday; now at home then it still resolves to the old lab).  But if you type 'ncatlab.org' into a browser you will always end up _here_, it just might be via a slightly circuitous route.

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: I just created [[normal subgroup]], [[normal closure]], but they do not render correctly on my IE. Is this a new-system glitch? The letters and formulas are one across another. Did not make last night logging that I added a paragraph or so on the Jacobi matrix and the application (Alexander polynomial) into the [[Fox derivative]]. I also created [[derived affine scheme]] in the sense of Toen et al. 

  [[Andrew Stacey]]: No idea!  Can you send me a screen shot?  Unfortunately, the Windows machine that I have control over can't connect to the wireless network here (Oh, the irony!) and the windows machine that I don't have control over doesn't have MathML support.

* [[Andrew Stacey]]: The migrating eagle has landed.

  There will inevitably be hiccoughs, hangups, and hassles.  Please log them over at the [nForum](http://www.math.ntnu.no/~stacey/Vanilla/nForum).  Also, if you notice weird behaviour then there may be an explanation of it over there (just because I know what causes it doesn't mean I've implemented the fix yet).

* [[Urs Schreiber]]

  * replied at [[Bousfield localization]]

* [[Jon Awbrey]]:

  * "A [[continuous predicate]], as described by [[Charles Sanders Peirce]], is a special type of relational predicate that arises as the limit of an iterated process of [[hypostatic abstraction]]."

*  [[Rafael Borowiecki]]:
  * Posed a question at [[Timeline of category theory and related mathematics]] regarding a new migration: How do i handle to update most of 1500 links!?
    * [[Andrew Stacey]]: I've looked for your question and can't find it.  I apologise if it's been lost in the migration, but can you ask it again?  If it's technical, the forum might be a better place to ask it.
  * Suggested that manifold objects should be treated or at least mentioned at [[manifold]].
  * Provided references for my question at [[Bousfield localization]].
  * Split the subsection what is category theory at [[category theory]] into two parts: In the narrow sense and In the wide sense. This makes sense.
  * Added briefly how toposes and higher categories come into category theory as a foundations at [[category theory]].
  * Added what it means for category theory to be a unifying tool and language in mathematics at [[category theory]].
  * Replied to the discussion at [[category theory]].

   I see the migration went well, at least so far. :)

   ([[Andrew Stacey]]: actually, it happened _after_ you posted this, but thanks all the same!

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Happy September!!!

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Now, you know it\'s not September for another half hour, right?  (^_^)

   * [[Urs Schreiber]]: oops, you are right, I forgot that I am not exactly at GMT +0. 

* [[Urs Schreiber]]

  * moved the accumulated latest changes of last month to [[2009 August changes]] (by renaming the last "latest changes" and then creating a new one)


***

[[2008 changes|First list]] — [[2009 August changes|Previous list]] — No next list — **Current list**

***


category: meta

[[!redirects recently revised]]


[[!redirects 2009 September changes]]