
This entry compiles material related to the textbook


* [[Tammo tom Dieck]], 

  \linebreak

  **Transformation Groups**

  \linebreak

  de Gruyter 1987 

  [doi:10.1515/9783110858372]( https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110858372)

on [[transformation groups]]/[[topological G-spaces]], [[equivariant homotopy theory]] and [[equivariant cohomology]].

Beware the existence of a book of similar title, by the same author and largely on the same subjects:

* [[Tammo tom Dieck]], _[[Transformation Groups and Representation Theory]]_, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 766, Springer 1979 ([doi:10.1007/BFb0085965](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/BFb0085965))

See also:

* {#Bredon72} [[Glen Bredon]], *[[Introduction to compact transformation groups]]*, Academic Press  1972 ([ISBN 9780080873596](https://www.elsevier.com/books/introduction-to-compact-transformation-groups/bredon/978-0-12-128850-1)
, [pdf](http://www.indiana.edu/~jfdavis/seminar/Bredon,Introduction_to_Compact_Transformation_Groups.pdf))


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Chapter I Foundations

1. Basic notions

2. General remarks. Examples

3. Elementary properties

4. Functorial properties

5. Differentiable manifolds. Tubes and slices

   * [[equivariant differential topology]]

   * [[slice theorem]]

6. Families of subgroups

7. Equivariant maps

   * [[equivariant function]]

8. Bundles

   * [[equivariant bundle]]

9. Vector bundles

   * [[equivariant vector bundle]]

10. Orbit categories, fundamental groups, and coverings

   * [[orbit category]]

11. Elementary algebra of transformation groups



## Chapter II Algebraic Topology

1. Equivariant CW-complexes

   * [[G-CW complex]]

2. Maps between complexes

3. Obstruction theory

4. The classification theorem of Hopf

   * [[equivariant Hopf degree theorem]]

5. Maps between complex representation spheres

6. Stable homotopy. Homology. Cohomology

   * [[G-spectrum]]

   * [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]]

   * [[equivariant cohomology]]

7. Homology with families

8. The Burnside ring and stable homotopy

   * [[equivariant stable Cohomotopy]]

9. Bredon homology and Mackey functors

   * [[Bredon cohomology]], [[Mackey functor]]

10. Homotopy representations



## Chapter III Localization

1. Equivariant bundle cohomology

2. Cohomology of some classifying spaces

3. Localization

4. Applications of localization

5. Borel-Smith functions

6. Further results for cyclic groups. Applications


## Chapter IV The Burnside Ring

1. Additive invariants

2. The Burnside ring

   * [[Burnside ring]]

3. The space of subgroups

4. Prime ideals

5. Congruences

6. Finiteness theorems

7. Idempotent elements

8. Induction categories

9. Induction theory

10. The Burnside ring and localization



\linebreak

category: reference



