[[!redirects 3-place relation]]
[[!redirects ternary relation]]

A __triadic relation__ (or a __ternary relation__) is an important special case of a [[relation theory|polyadic or finitary relation]], one in which the number of places in the relation is three.  One may also see the adjectives _3-adic_, _3-ary_, _3-dimensional_, or _3-place_ being used to describe these relations.

Mathematics is positively rife with examples of 3-adic relations, and the concept of a [[sign relation]], a special case of a 3-adic relation, is fundamental to the field of semiotics, or the theory of signs.  Therefore it will be useful to consider a few concrete examples from each of these two realms.

## Examples from mathematics ##

Let $\mathbb{B} = \{ 0, 1 \}$ and let &ldquo;+&rdquo; be taken in the sense of GF(2).

For the sake of topics to be taken up later it is useful to examine a pair of 3-adic relations in tandem that are defined as follows:

$$L_0 = \{ (x, y, z) \in \mathbb{B}^3 : x + y + z = 0 \}.$$

$$L_1 = \{ (x, y, z) \in \mathbb{B}^3 : x + y + z = 1 \}.$$

The triples that make up the relations $L_0$ and $L_1$ are conveniently arranged in the form of relational data tables, as follows:

$$
\array{
\array{
\arrayopts{\frame{solid}\rowlines{solid solid none}}
\cellopts{\colspan{3}} L_0 = \{ (x, y, z) \in \mathbb{B}^3 : x + y + z = 0 \} \\
x & y & z \\
0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 1 \\
1 & 0 & 1 \\
1 & 1 & 0  }
&
\array{
\arrayopts{\frame{solid}\rowlines{solid solid none}}
\cellopts{\colspan{3}} L_1 = \{ (x, y, z) \in \mathbb{B}^3 : x + y + z = 1 \} \\
x & y & z \\
0 & 0 & 1 \\
0 & 1 & 0 \\
1 & 0 & 0 \\
1 & 1 & 1  }
}
$$

## Examples from semiotics ##

The study of signs, the full array of significant forms of expression, in relation to the things that signs are significant _of_, as well as in relation to the interpretive agents that signs are significant _to_, is known as _semiotics_ or the _theory of signs_.  As just described, semiotics treats of a 3-place relation among signs, their objects, and their interpreters.

The term _semiosis_ refers to any activity or process that involves signs.  Studies of semiosis that deal with its more abstract form are not concerned with every concrete detail of the entities that act as signs, objects, or agents of semiosis, but only with the most salient patterns of relationship among these three roles.  In particular, the formal theory of signs does not consider every property of the interpretive agent but only the more striking features of the impressions that signs make on a representative interpreter.  In its formal aspects that impact or influence may be treated as just another sign, called the _interpretant sign_, or the _interpretant_ for short.  Hence the definition of a [[sign relation]] as a 3-adic relation among objects, signs, and interpretants.

## External links ##

* [Triadic Relation @ MyWikiBiz](http://mywikibiz.com/Triadic_relation)

* [Triadic Relation @ PlanetMath](http://planetmath.org/encyclopedia/TriadicRelation.html)
