## Overview and definition

Let $\Gamma$ be a congruence subgroup of $SL(2,\mathbf{Z})$ and $\mathcal{M}(\Gamma)$ the graded (by the weight) algebra of modular forms with respect to $\Gamma$. All bidifferential operators which leave that space invariant are linear combinations of Rankin-Cohen brackets $[-,-]_n\colon(f, g)\mapsto [f,g]_n$. By definition, $n$-th bracket between elements $f\in\mathcal{M}(\Gamma)_{2k}$ and $g\in\mathcal{M}(\Gamma)_{2l}$ is given by the formula
$$
[f,g]_n := \sum_{r=0}^n (-1)^r\binom{n+2k-1}{n-r}\binom{n+2l-1}{r}f^{(r)}g^{(n-r)}\,\in \,\mathcal{M}(\Gamma)_{2k+2l+2n}
$$ 
where $f^{(r)} := \left(\frac{1}{2\pi i}\frac{\partial}{\partial z}\right)^r f$.
Moscovici and Connes have constructed a sequence of Hopf algebras $\mathcal{H}_q$ related to geometry of [[foliation]]s. Hopf algebra $\mathcal{H}_q$ has deformations which may be given by universal deformation formulas, or in other words, by [[Drinfeld twist]]s which are power series in formal variable with unit free term. These 2-cocycles have the structure appearing in Rankin-Cohen brackets and are called Rankin-Cohen deformations and are akin in structure to what is in quantum group context known as [[Jordanian twist]]s, coming from the work of Gurevich on (generalized) Jordanian R-matrices, and of Ogievetsky, Coll-Gerstenhaber-Giaquinto and in a closer symmetrized form by Giaquinto and Zhang. An isomorphism between (reduced) Rankin-Cohen deformation and Jordanian deformation has been exhibited by Samsonov.

## Literature

* R. A. Rankin, _The construction of automorphic forms from the derivatives of a given form_, J. Indian Math.Soc., (N.S.) 20 (1956) 103–116
* H. Cohen, _Sums involving the values at negative integers of L-functions of quadratic characters_, Math.Ann. 217 (1975) 271-285
* P. Cohen, Yu. Manin, D. Zagier, _Automorphic pseudodifferential operators_, Algebraic aspects of integrable systems, 17–47, Progr. Nonlinear Differential Equations Appl.26, Birkauser 1997
* [[Alain Connes]], [[Henri Moscovici]], _Rankin-Cohen brackets and the Hopf algebra of transverse geometry_, Mosc. Math. J. __4__:1 (2004) 111–130
* R. Rochberg, X. Tang, Y. Yao, _A survey of Rankin-Cohen deformations_, Perspectives on Noncommutative Geometry, Fields Inst. Commun. 61:7 (2011) [arXiv:0909.4364](https://arxiv.org/abs/0909.4364)
* P. Bieliavsky, X. Tang, Y. Yao, _Rankin–Cohen brackets and formal quantization_, Adv. Math. __212__:1 (2007) 293-314 [doi](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aim.2006.10.007)
* M. Samsonov, _Quantization of semi-classical twists and noncommutative geometry_, Lett. Math. Phys. __75__ (2006) 63–77 [doi](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11005-005-0038-2)