
#Idea#

_Extended quantum field theory_ (or _many-tiered quantum field theory_) is the [[higher category theory|higher categorical]] version of [[FQFT|functorial quantum field theory]]:

whereas 

* [[category theory|1-categorical]] [[TQFT]] may be regarded as a rule that allows to compute topological invariants $Z(\Sigma)$ assigned to $n$-dimensional [[manifold]]s by cutting these manifolds into a sequence $\{\Sigma_i\}$ of $n$-dimensional composable [[cobordism]]s with $(n-1)$-dimensional boundaries $\partial \Sigma_i$, e.g.  $\Sigma = \Sigma_2 \coprod_{\partial \Sigma_1 = \partial \Sigma_2} \Sigma_1$, then assigning quantities $Z(\Sigma_i)$ to each of these and then composing these quantities in some way, e.g. as $Z(\Sigma) = Z(\Sigma_2)\circ Z(\Sigma_1)$;

we have that

* in extended [[TQFT]] $Z(\Sigma)$ may be computed by decomposing $\Sigma$ into pieces of arbitrary codimension $d$, i.e. into $(n-d)$-dimensional pieces.

For that reason extended QFT is also sometimes called **local** or **localized** QFT. In fact, the notion of locality in [[quantum field theory]] is precisely this notion of locality. And, as also discussed at [[FQFT]], this higher dimensional version of locality is naturally encoded in terms of [[higher category theory|n-functoriality]] of $Z$ regarded as a functor on a [[higher category theory|higher category]] of [[cobordism]]s.

#The category of extended cobordisms#

The definition of a j-cobordism is recursive. A (j+1)-cobordism between j-cobordisms is a closed smooth compact oriented (j+1)-manifold with boundary the disjoint union of the j-cobordism.

$nCob_m$ is a n-category with closed smooth compact oriented n-manifolds as objects and cobordisms of cobordisms up to m-cobordisms, up to diffeomorphism, as morphisms.

There are various suggestions with more or less detail for a precise definition of a higher category $nBord_n$ (or also denoted $nCob_n$ or similar) of fully extended $n$-dimensional cobordisms. 

A very general one is described at [[(∞,n)-category of cobordisms]].

See 

* [[extended cobordism]].


#Definition#
For a fixed base ring $R$,
and C a symmetric monoidal n-category.

A m-extended C-valued TQFT of dimension n is a symmetric n-tensor functor $Z:nCob_m \rightarrow$C that assign
* closed smooth compact oriented n-manifolds $\rightarrow$ elements of $R$
* closed smooth compact oriented (n-1)-manifolds $\rightarrow$ $R$-modules
* bordisms of closed smooth compact oriented (n-1)-manifolds $\rightarrow$ $R$-linear maps between $R$-modules
* closed smooth compact oriented (n-2)-manifolds $\rightarrow$ $R$-linear 1-categories
* bordisms of closed smooth compact oriented (n-2)-manifolds $\rightarrow$ functors between $R$-linear 1-categories

* . . .
(this is so typical, instiki don't display correctly)

* closed smooth compact oriented 0-manifolds $\rightarrow$ $R$-linear (m-2)-categories
* bordisms of closed smooth compact oriented 0-manifolds $\rightarrow$ (m-2)-functors between $R$-linear (m-2)-categories

with compatibility conditions and gluing formulas that must be satisfied...

m can range between 2 and n+1.

This suggests that one can see ETQFT's as C-valued representations of $nCob_m$.

+-- {: .query}
_Rafael_: I obviously used a linear category in the definition as C instead of a general C. Do anyone know how to generalize it? Neither do i know the compatibility conditions and gluing formulas, any good explicit references?
=--
#Examples#

m=2 gives ordinary TQFT.

The most common case is when $R$=$C$ (the complex numbers) giving unitary ETQFT.

The most common cases for C is
C=$nHilb(R)$, the category of n-Hilbert spaces over a field $R$. As far as i know it is only defined up to n=2.

C=$nVect(R)$, the category of n-vector spaces over a field $R$.

C=$nMod(R)$, the (conjectured?) category of n-$R$-modules.

#Construction of ETQFT's#

* By generators and relations

* By path integrals (this is Daniel Freed's approach)

* By modular tensor n-categories?

#Classification of ETQFT's#

See [[cobordism hypothesis]].

#Relation of ETQFT to AQFT#

See Urs Schreiber, [AQFT from n-functorial QFT](http://arxiv.org/abs/0806.1079).

#Related entries#

More on extended QFTs is also at 

* [[FQFT]]

#References#

* Daniel Freed, Remarks on Chern-Simons theory

* Daniel Freed, Quantum Groups from Path Integrals 

* Daniel Freed, Higher Algebraic Structures and Quantization 

* John Baez and James Dolan, Higher-dimensional Algebra and Topological Quantum Field Theory.  [arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/q-alg/9503002)

* [[Jacob Lurie]],  [[On the Classification of Topological Field Theories]]  

+-- {: .query}
_Rafael_: I am very tired because it is very late.
Please check and expand this page, i am not counting very good with my eyes half closed neither am i an expert on ETQFT.

[[Urs Schreiber]]: notice that I had a bit on extended QFT over at [[FQFT]]. Maybe some of the material needs to be merged. i have now at least added links back and forth.

_Rafael_: Yes, for the merge. I think of a subsection here **construction of ETQFTs** and a pointer to the relation between ETQFT to AQFT. I also think you are much better to include the construction of ETQFTs in **Nonabelian cocycles and their sigma model QFTs** than me.

=--