\tableofcontents

\section{Idea of a situs }

A _situs_ is a simplicial object of 
the [[category of filters|category of filters on sets]], i.e. 
a simplicial set equipped, for each $n\geq 0$, 
with a filter on the set of $n$-simplices such that 
under any face or degeneration map the preimage of a large set is large. 
We denote the category of situses by s&#x12CB;.


Intuitively, these filters are viewed 
as additional structure of topological nature on a simplicial set 
("the situs structure on a simplicial set")
giving a meaning to the phrase "a simplex is sufficiently small":
by definition, we say "a property holds for all small enough $n$-simplices"
iff it holds on a set in the filter, and we refer to sets 
in the filter as _neighbourhoods_. 
This extends to simplicial language the standard intuition of topology:
given a topological structure on a set, the precise meaning of the phrase
"a property $P_{x_0}(x)$ holds for all points $x$ sufficiently close to a given point $x_0$"
is that the property holds on a neighbourhood of $x_0$;
intuitively, $x$ near $x_0$ is thought of as  small because $x$ approximates $x_0$ up to a small error. 

Situses  generalise metric and topological spaces, filters, and simplicial sets, 
and the concept is designed to be flexible enough to formulate 
categorically
a number of standard basic elementary definitions 
in various fields, e.g. in analysis, 
limit, (uniform) continuity and convergence, 
equicontinuity of sequences of functions;
in algebraic topology, being locally trivial and geometric realisation; in 
geometry, quasi-isomorphism;
in model theory, stability and simplicity of a theory. 

No homotopy theory for situses has been developed,
although the naive definition of an [interval object](#IntervalSitus) 
(namely, the simplicial set represented by the linear order $[0,1]$ 
equipped 
with some situs structure based on the metric/topology)
leads to a [[directed topological space|directed (not symmetric) notion of homotopy]].

\section{Examples}

We now give a number of examples demonstrating the expressive power 
of the category of situses. 


\subsection{Simplicial sets as situses}


A simplicial set can be equipped with discrete or indiscrete situs structure: 
%The (in)discrete situs structure on a simplicial set
for each $n$, equip $X_n$ with the discrete or indiscrete filter, respectively.




\subsection{Metric spaces: uniformly continuous maps and quasi-isometries}

Let $M$ be a metric space. View $M$ as a simplicial set represented by the set of points of $M$, and equip each $M^n$ with the filter 
generated by uniform neighbourhoods of the diagonal, 
i.e. subsets containing all tuples of small enough diameter. 
With this situs structure, 
a map  $f:M\to N$ is uniformly continuous iff
it induces a morphism $f_\bullet:M_\bullet\to N_\bullet$ of situses.
In fact this defines a fully faithful embedding of the category
of metric spaces with uniformly continuous maps 
into the category of situses. 


We can also consider a different situs structure 
capturing the notion of quasi-isomorphism in large scale geometry.
Equip each $M^n$ with the filter 
such that a subset of $M^n$ is large iff it contains
all $n$-tuples such that the distance between 
distinct points is at least $D$, for some $D\geq 0$. 
With this situs structure, 
for quasi-geodesic metric spaces, 
a map $f_\bullet:M_\bullet\to N_\bullet$ is an isomorphism of situses
iff $f:M\to N$ is an quasi-isometry. 



\subsection{A filter as a situs}

Given a filter $\mathfrak{F}$ on a set $X$, 
there is a coarsest situs structure on 
$X$ viewed as a simplicial set (i.e. 
the simplicial set $|X|_\bullet$ represented by $X$) 
such that its filter on the set $X$ of $0$-simplices is 
finer than $\mathfrak{F}$. 
Dually, there is a finest  situs structure on $|X|_\bullet$
such that its filter on the set of $0$-simplices is coarser than $\mathfrak{F}$.
{#DiagCartDefn} We denote these situses by 
 $|X^\mathfrak{F}|_\bullet^{\operatorname{cart}}$
and  $|X^\mathfrak{F}|_\bullet^{\operatorname{diag}}$, respectively.



 In fact this gives two fully faithful embeddings of the category of filters into the category of situses
$$ |-^\mathfrak{F}|_\bullet^{\operatorname{cart}}, |-^\mathfrak{F}|_\bullet^{\operatorname{diag}} : &#x12CB;  \to s&#x12CB; $$


 
{#PreordersAsSituses} In a similar way one can define two fully faithful embeddings of the category of filters on preorders
and continuous monotone maps. We denote these by 
$X^{\leq\mathfrak{F}}_\bullet^{\operatorname{cart}}$
and  $X^{\leq\mathfrak{F}}_\bullet^{\operatorname{diag}}$, respectively.




\subsection{Topological and uniform spaces as situses }

More generally, given an arbitrary 
simplicial set $X_\bullet$ and a filter $\mathfrak{F}$ on the set of $n$-simplices $X_n$, 
there is a coarsest/finest situs structure on $X_\bullet$
such that its filter on the set of $n$-simplices is finer/coarser 
than $\mathfrak{F}$. Taking $n=0$ and the filter $\mathfrak{F}$ always indiscrete gives two fully faithful embeddings of the category of simplicial sets into the category of situses. 


We use this to define situses corresponding to uniform and topological spaces. 

\subsubsection{Uniform spaces as situses }

Take a set $X$ and view it as a simplicial set $X_\bullet$ (represented by $X$). A uniform structure on $X$ is a filter on  $X\times X$; 
take the coarsest situs structure with this filter on
the set $X\times X$ of $1$-simplices. This is the situs
associated with the uniform structure on $X$. 

In fact, it is easy to define uniform spaces in terms of situses.
A filter on $X\times X$ is a uniform structure iff it is symmetric
(i.e. the endomorphism of $X\times X$, $(x,y)\mapsto (y,x)$ permuting the coordinates is continuous)
and this construction produces a situs such that the filter on $X\times X\times X$
is the coarsest filter such that the two maps $X^3\to X\times X$, $(x_1,x_2,x_3)\mapsto (x_i,x_{i+1}),i=1,2$ 
are continuous. This can be used to characterise situses arising 
from uniform structures as those symmetric situses such that
the filter of $X\times X\times X$ has this property. 
We say that a situs is symmetric iff
it factors though the category of non-empty finite sets. 

\subsubsection{Topological spaces as situses}

The situs associated to a topological structure on $X$ 
is defined in the same way starting from 
the filter of non-uniform neighbourhoods of the diagonal on $X\times X$
defined as consisting of the subsets of 
form $\bigcup_{x\in X} \{x\}\times U_x$ where
$U_x\ni x$ is a not necessarily open neighbourhood of $x\in X$.


A trivial verification shows these constructions 
define fully faithful embeddings
of the categories of topological and of uniform spaces 
into the category of situses, and in fact 
there are corresponding forgetful functors to these categories 
such that the following compositions are the identity:
$$Top \to s&#x12CB; \to Top$$
$$UniformSpaces \to s&#x12CB; \to UniformSpaces .$$


\subsection{Cauchy sequences and equicontinuity }


A filter $\mathfrak{F}$ on a metric space $M$ is _Cauchy_ iff 
$\mathfrak{F}^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet \to M_\bullet$ is continuous. 

A sequence of functions $f_i:L \to M$, $i\in \mathbb{N}$ of metric spaces
is _uniformly equicontinuous_ iff the map $(\mathbb{ N}^{cofinite})^{\operatorname{diag}}_\bullet\times L_\bullet \to M_\bullet$ is continuous. 


A sequence of functions $f_i:X \to M$, $i\in \mathbb {N}$ from a topological space $X$ to a metric space $M$
is _equicontinuous_ iff the map $(\mathbb{ N}^{cofinite})^{\operatorname{diag}}_\bullet\times X_\bullet \to M_\bullet$ is continuous. 



\subsection{Limits, compactness, and completeness }

An endomorphism of the category $\Delta$ of finite linear orders gives rise to an endomorphism of the category of situses.
Of particular interest is the shift 
endomorphism $\Delta\to\Delta$ adding a new least element ([[decalage]] considers the endomorphism adding a new greatest element rather than least) 
on objects, $n\mapsto 1+n$, and on morphisms, 
$f:n\to m$ goes to $f[+1]:1+n\to 1+m$, $f(0)=0$, $f[+1](1+i)=1+f(i)$, $0\leq i\leq n$. 
The object $X_\bullet\circ [+1]$ and morphism $X_\bullet\circ [+1]\to X$
allows one to talk about local properties of $X_\bullet$, 
e.g. limits and local triviality. 

\subsubsection{Limits via shift endomorphism}

For example, taking a _limit_ of a filter $\mathfrak{F}$ on 
a topological or metric space $X$ corresponds to taking the factorization 
$$\mathfrak{F}^{\operatorname{diag}}_\bullet\to X_\bullet\circ [+1]\to X_\bullet.$$
Indeed, the underlying simplicial set of $\mathfrak{F}^{\operatorname{diag}}_\bullet$
is connected and thus maps to a single connected component 
of  $X_\bullet\circ [+1]=\sqcup_{x\in X} \{x\}\times X_\bullet$ 
(here we consider the equality of the underlying simplicial sets);
continuity of the map $\mathfrak{F} \to  X\times X$, $x\mapsto (x_0,x)$
means exactly that the first coordinate $x_0$ is a limit point 
of $\mathfrak{F}$ on $X$.



\subsubsection{Compactness and completeness as lifting properties}
Diagram chasing reformulation of the notion above allows to define compactness and completeness as [lifting properties](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lifting_property).

A metric space $M$ is _complete_ iff 
$\bot\to (\mathbb{N}^{cofinite})^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet \rightthreetimes M_\bullet\circ [+1]\to M_\bullet$.


Such a reformulation raises the question whether the notion of completeness may be 
defined with help of the archetypal counterexample: is a metric space $M$ complete 
iff  
$$ M_\bullet\circ [+1]\to M_\bullet \in (\mathbb {R}_\bullet\circ [+1]\to \mathbb{R}_\bullet)^{\rightthreetimes lr} ? $$



A topological space $X$ is _compact_ iff for each ultrafilter $\mathfrak{U}$ it holds
$\bot\to \mathfrak{U}^{\operatorname{diag}}_\bullet \rightthreetimes M_\bullet\circ [+1]\to M_\bullet$.


A topological space $K$ is _compact_ iff 
$$K_\bullet \circ [+1]\to K_\bullet \in 
(\{\{o\},\{o,1\}\}^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet \cup  \{\{1\},\{o,1\}\}^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet\to  \{\{o,1\}\}^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet)^{\rightthreetimes lr}.$$
Here
$\{\{o\},\{o,1\}\}$, $\{\{1\},\{o,1\}\}$, and $\{\{o,1\}\}$
are viewed as filters on the set $\{o,1\}$. (needs verification)


\subsection{Local triviality }

A map $f:X\to Y$ of topological or metric spaces is locally trivial with fibre $F$ 
iff in s&#x12CB; becomes a direct product with $F_\bullet$ ("globally trivial") 
after base-change 
$Y_\bullet\circ [+1]\to Y_\bullet$. That is,  
$f_\bullet:(Y_\bullet\circ [+1])\times_{Y_\bullet} X_\bullet \to  Y_\bullet\circ [+1]$
is of form $ (Y_\bullet\circ [+1])\times F_\bullet \to  Y_\bullet\circ [+1]$.



\subsection{Geometric realisation}




The notion of [[geometric realization]] involves 
topological spaces and simplicial sets, 
which both are situses. This allows one to interpret
the Besser-Drinfeld-Grayson construction 
of geometric realisation in s&#x12CB;, as follows.


View the standard geometric simplex in $\mathbb{R}^n$
as the space of monotone maps 
$[0,1]^\leq \to (n+1)^\leq$ with 
Skorokhod-type metric 
$dist(f,g):= sup_{x} inf_{y} \{ |x-y| : f(x)=g(y) \}$.
The category of situses allows us to view both linear orders as situses:
the situs structure on $[0,1]_\bullet$ "remembers" the metric, 
and the situs structure on $\Delta_n=Hom(-,(n+1)^\leq)$ 
"remembers" the equality $f(x)=g(x)$, i.e. is the finest situs
structure such that the filter on the set of 0-simplices is indiscrete.  
Then one may define a situs structure on the inner hom 
$$HHom_{Skorokhod}([0,1]_\bullet, -) :s&#x12CB;\to s&#x12CB;$$
of the underlying simplicial sets
motivated by the definition of Skorokhod metric. 

This gives the construction of geometric realisation due to  
Besser, Drinfeld, and Grayson. 
See details at section 3.2 of [[geometric realization]].



\subsection{The interval object and homotopy theory } 
{#IntervalSitus} No homotopy theory for situses has been developed. 
The naive definition of an [[interval object]] used to define 
in s&#x12CB; geometric realisation
 eqipped with some situs structure "remembering" the topology, 
does not appear very useful, particularly 
for dealing with situses arising in model theory 
and the [lifting properties](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lifting_property)
defining stability and simplicity (defined below). 
However, note that the naive interval object 
 $[0,1]^\leq_\bullet$ reminds one of [[directed topological space|directed topological spaces]]: 
it is directed by definition 
and so would be 
any naive notion of homotopy associated with it:
a homotopy from $A$ to $B$ cannot in general 
be reversed to get a homotopy from $B$ to $A$.



\subsection{Stability and simplicity in model theory}

Let us now describe how situses can be used to reformulate
two notions of model theory: stability and simplicity of a first-order theory. 

\subsubsection{Stability. }

Consider a model $M$ in a language $\mathcal {L}$, and a linear order $I$. 
For an $r$-ary $\mathcal {L}$-formula $\phi(x_1,...,x_r)$, 
we say that a sequence $(a_i)_{i\in I}$ of elements of $M$ 
is $\phi$-indiscernible (with repetitions) 
iff for either all or none of the 
subsequences $(a_{i_1},...,a_{i_r}), i_1\le ... \le i_r$ (of distinct elements) 
the formula $\phi(a_{i_1},...,a_{i_r})$ holds in $M$. 

Equip $M^n$ with the filter generated by 
the sets of all $n$-tuples which are $\phi$-indiscernible with repetitions,
where $\phi$ varies through all $\mathcal{L}$-formulas.
The situs so obtained is called {the generalised pre-Stone space 
of $M$ in s&#x12CB;} because the forgetful functor $s&#x12CB;\to Top$ takes it 
to the set of elements of $M$ equipped with the preimage 
of [[Stone topology]];
by this we mean the topology on $M$ generated by 
sets of elements realising unary $\mathcal{L}$-formulas. 
There are many variants of this definition, notably instead of 
being $\phi$-indiscernible
one may require being a part of an {infinite} $\phi$-indiscernible sequence,
and instead of $M^n$ consider the set of $n$-types  $S_n(\emptyset)$ 
or $S_n(M)$. 

We shall reformulate the following characterisation of 
stable theories as a lifting property in s&#x12CB;. 

A first-order theory 
is stable iff in a saturated enough model it holds that each 
 $\phi$-indiscernible sequence of $n$-tuples is in fact a $\phi$-indiscernible set,
for each $n\ge 0$ and each formula $\phi$ of the language of the theory. 

For $n=1$ this can be reformulated as a lifting property in s&#x12CB; as follows. 

Fix a linear order $I$.  
Let $I^\leq_\bullet:=(T^\leq)^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet$ be the situs associated with the preorder $I^\leq$ with the indiscrete filter.
[Recall](#PreordersAsSituses) that this is the simplicial set 
$n^\leq \mapsto Hom_{preorders} (n^\leq, I^\leq)$ represented by $I^\leq$ as a linear order, 
equipped with indiscrete filters. 
Let  $(I^{\leq tails})^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet$ denote the  situs associated with the preorder $I^\leq$ with the  {filter of tails}
generated by the subsets containing all elements large enough. 


Let  $(|I|^{tails})^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet$ denote the situs associated with the filter of tails on the set of elements of $I$. 


An indiscernible sequence indexed by a linear order $I$ is an injective continuous map $(I^{\leq})^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet \to M_\bullet$.


An indiscernible set indexed by $I$ is an injective continuous map $|I|^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet \to M_\bullet$.


An eventually indiscernible sequence indexed on a linear order $I$ is an injective continuous map 
$(I^{\leq tails})^{ cart}_\bullet \to M_\bullet$.

\begin{proposition}
Let $M$ be a model. The following are equivalent:

i. each $\phi$-indiscernible sequence of elements is in fact a $\phi$-indiscernible set.

ii. the situs $M_\bullet$ is symmetric

iii. the following lifting property holds in s&#x12CB;:
$$ (I^{\leq tails})^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet\to (|I|^{tails})^{\operatorname{cart}}_\bullet 
\rightthreetimes M_\bullet\to \top .$$
\end{proposition}

[Simon,2021](#Simon2021) implies that a theory is stable iff the lifting property iii. holds 
for the situs associated with $M\times M$ considered in the language with arbitrary parameters, 
for a saturated enough model $M$ of the theory.




\subsubsection{Simplicity. }

The definition of simplicity is not as simple combinatorially. 

First let us introduce the situs associated with a model
for this purpose; this situs structure is defined to talk 
about consistency of instances of a formula. Fix a formula $\phi$. 
As usual, the situs is based on the simplicial set represented by the 
set of elements of $M$.
The filter on $M^n$ is generated by a single set 
of those tuples $(a_1,...,a_n)$ such that  
$M\models \exists x \bigwedge_{1\leq i\leq n}  \phi(x,a_i)$. 
Let us denote this situs by $M_\bullet^{\exists\phi}$ and call it the _$\phi$-consistency_ situs of model $M$.


The reformulation in terms of situses uses 
the definition of a simple first-order theory which 
says
that each formula of the theory has 
NTP ("not the tree property")
see [Tent-Ziegler, Def.7.2.1](#TentZiegler), or [3,\S9](#3) 
NTP is defined as a lifting property with respect to a morphism 
involving the following combinatorial structures.

We recall the definition of NTP and a simple theory. 

\begin{definition}[Tent-Ziegler,7.2.1] 1. A formula $\varphi(x, y)$ has the tree property 
(with respect to k) if there is a tree of parameters $(a_s\,\,|\,\,\emptyset \neq s \in {}^{\lt\omega}\omega )$ such that:

 a) For all $s\in {}^{\lt\omega}\omega $, $(\varphi(x, a_{si} )\,\,|\,\,i \lt\omega )$ is $k$-inconsistent.

 b) For all $\sigma\in {}^{\omega}\omega $ $ \{\varphi(x, a_s )\,\,|\,\,\emptyset \neq s\subseteq \sigma  \}$ is consistent.


 2. A theory T is simple if there is no formula $\varphi(x, y)$ with the tree property.

\end{definition}  




Let $T^\leq$ be an infinitely branching tree of infinite depth, 
viewed as preorder, and equipped with the indiscrete filter.  
We may take $T^\leq$ to be ${}^{\lt\omega}\omega$. 
Let $T^\leq_\bullet:=(T^\leq)^{cart}_\bullet$ 
denote the corresponding situs.
[Recall](#PreordersAsSituses) that by definition $T^\leq_\bullet(n)$
is the set of ordered (weakly increasing) $n$-tuples
of vertices of $T$, and there is  only one large subset,
namely the whole set. 

Note that to give a morphism $T^\leq_\bullet \to M_\bullet^{\exists\phi}$ of the underlying simplicial sets
is the same as to give a a tree of parameters $(a_s\,\,|\,\,\emptyset \neq s \in {}^{\lt\omega}\omega )$. This morphism is continious 
iff these parameters satisfy item b,
in notation of the definition: indeed, 
continuity means that the preigame of the large (by definition) 
set of $\phi$-consistent tuples is large, i.e. the whole
set $T^\leq_\bullet(n)$ of ordered tuples, for each $n$.  

Let $|T|_\bullet$ be the simplicial set represented by the set 
$|T|$ of vertices of $T$, namely 
$|T|_\bullet(n^\leq)=|T|^n$. 
Let $|T|^{TP}_\bullet$ denote the simplicial set $|T|_\bullet$
equipped with the _$TP$-tautological_ filter on $|T|_\bullet(n^\leq)$ defined as follows:

   a subset is not small iff it contains all the tuples
   required to be inconsistent by the tree property 
   with respect to a subtree-counterexample to the tree property. 

In more detail, a subset $\epsilon$ is large iff for each isomorphic copy
of $T'={}^{\lt\omega}\omega$ in $T^\leq$ there is a vertex $v\in T'$
and its immediate (in $T'$) descendants $v_1,..,v_k \in \epsilon \cap T'$.
%A verification shows that this indeed defines a filter. 
 
Note that the map $T^\leq_\bullet \to |T|_\bullet^{TP}$ is continuous
because no tuple of increasing elements is required to be $\phi$-inconsistent by the tree property. 

\begin{proposition}
The following are equivalent:

i. the formula $\phi$ has NTP with respect $k$ in the model $M$

ii. in s&#x12CB; there is no morphism $\tau:T^\leq_\bullet\to M_\bullet^{\exists\phi}$ such that
    for each tuple $k$-tuple $v_1,..,v_k$, for each $k$, 
     of immediate descendants of the same vertex, 
     $M \models\neg \exists x (\phi(x,\tau(v_1))\wedge ... \wedge \phi(x,\tau(v_n))$


iii. In s&#x12CB; the following lifting property holds:
$T^\leq_\bullet \to |T|^{TP}_\bullet
\rightthreetimes M_\bullet^{\exists\phi}\to \top $
\end{proposition}
\begin{proof} ii. is exactly the definition of NTP for formula $\phi$
as stated in ([Tent-Ziegler,  Def.7.2.1](#TentZiegler)), cf. [3,\S9](#3). 
In iii., one only needs to check that the unique lifting is 
continuous, namely that the set of tuples 
$(v_1,...,v_k)$ such that  $M \models \exists x (\phi(x,\tau(v_1))\wedge ... \wedge \phi(x,\tau(v_k))$ is large. 
By the definition of the filter, this set is large iff there is 
an infinitely branching subtree of infinite depth satisfying ii. 
This implies that ii. and iii. are equivalent. 

Finally, let us prove our filters are well-defined. 
We need only to show that the union of 
any two small sets $X\cup Y$ is small.
Assume it is not small. 
Label each vertex of the tree with the largest $n\lt\omega$
such that the first small subset contains 
above the vertex all tuples required to be inconsisent 
in some copy of ${}^{\lt n}\omega$. 
Above each vertex in $X$ there are at most finitely many vertices in $X$ labelled 
by the same or greater number. Removing them
leaves $X\cup Y$ not small. 
But then we get that vertices of $X$ are 
labelled by numbers strictly decreasing along 
any branch, hence $X$ is finite. Hence, $Y$ is not small.
\end{proof}

\begin{remark} One can similarly define 
$TP_i$-tautological situs of a tree $T$, for $i=1$,
and see that $TP_i$ is defined by a lifting property.
The same argument gives lifting properties 
related  to cdt, [inp](modeltheory.fandom.com/wiki/INP_pattern), 
and sct patterns
in classification theory.
\end{remark}

\subsection{References}

Some of these constructions are sketched in the drafts below.



Topology and analysis:

* {#1} [1] Misha Gavrilovich. The category of simplicial sets with a notion of smallness.
 [(pdf)](http://mishap.sdf.org/6a6ywke/6a6ywke.pdf)

Geometric realisation:

* {#2} [2] Misha Gavrilovich, Konstantin Pimenov.  Geometric realisation as the Skorokhod semi-continuous path space endofunctor. [(pdf)](http://mishap.sdf.org/SkorokhodGeometricRealisation.pdf)1

Stability and simplicity:

* {#TentZiegler} [TentZiegler] K.Tent, M.Ziegler. 
A Course in Model Theory. CUP. 2012.

* {#Scow2012} [Scow2012] Lynn Scow. 
Characterization of nip theories by ordered graph-indiscernibles. Annals of
Pure and Applied Logic, 163(11):1624 – 1641, 2012. [(pdf)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1106.5153)


* {#Simon2021} [Simon2021] Pierre Simon. A note on stability and NIP in one variable. 
[(pdf)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.15799)

* {#3} [3] Misha Gavrilovich. Remarks on Shelah's classification theory and Quillen's negation.
 [(pdf)](http://mishap.sdf.org/yetanothernotanobfuscatedstudy.pdf)