Under construction! Please be patient.

## Motivation

The descent data of classical (Grothendieck's) [[descent theory]] are usually treated in the generality of [[fibered categories]]. They correspond to cartesian lifts to the total category of the simplicial objects in the base, which are typically produced from covers (in Čech picture; this is not fully general as it presupposes certain coproducts in the base). In 1-categorical situation these data depend essentially only of a 2-truncation of the simplicial set hence the lift in a total category presents a 2-truncated pseudo-simplicial object. Descent data organize into a category of descent data. This category may be co-represented in an appropriate 2-categorical sense by a category equipped with certain data. The same situation can happen without any direct reference to descent theory. We start with a 2-truncation of a pseudosimplicial object in a bicategory and consider additional object in that bicategory and 1-cells satisfying a universal property. It can be viewed as certain weighted colimit called a [[codescent object]]. The notion is dual to the notion of [[descent object]] as defined in

* [[Ross Street]], _Correction to “Fibrations in bicategories”_, 
Cahiers de Topologie et Géométrie Différentielle Catégoriques __28__, no.1 (1987) 53--56 [numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item/?id=CTGDC_1987__28_1_53_0) 

A bicolimit weakening of the notion of codescent object is a bicodescent object. 

## Applications

The main example outside of descent theory is related to a comparison of the category of $T$-algebras for a 2-monad $T$ in strict 2-category to lax or pseudo-$T$-algebra. We ask if the inclusion of strict into lax or pseudoalgebras has a left 2-adjoint. 2-monad $T$ helps to define coherence data for a codescent object whose defining property is equivalent to the universal property of the 2-adjunction. Bicodescent objects were used in A. Corner's thesis to define an analogue of Day's convolution for monoidal bicategories. 

## Literature

* [[Ross Street]], _Categorical and combinatorial aspects of descent theory_, [arXiv:math.CT/0303175](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.CT/0303175)
* [[Stephen Lack]], _Codescent objects and coherence_, Stephen Lack, J. Pure and Appl. Algebra __175__ (2002) 223-241 <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-4049(02)00136-6">doi</a>
* Alex Corner, _Codescent Objects and Coherence_, at Category Cafe [2014/06](https://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2014/06/codescent_objects_and_coherenc.html)
* A.S. Corner, _Day convolution for monoidal bicategories_, PhD thesis, (2016)
* A.S. Corner, _A universal characterisation of codescent objects_, 
Theory and Applications of Categories 34 (24), 684-713 (2019)

[[!redirects codescent objects]]
