In his study of crystalline cohomology, Grothendieck has noticed that flat connections correspond to the descent data for de Rham descent; he called them the costratification of the first order. Already in EGA, Grothendieck has introduced a notion of [[regular differential operator]] and of jet-spaces, which were later by Malgrange and Spencer transferred into the study of differential equations and analytic deformation theory.

De Rham descent for a relative scheme (= morphism of schemes) $f: X\to S$ is formulated in terms of resolutions or infinitesimal thickenings of the diagonal for the simplicial scheme corresponding to $f$. Usually one assumes that $X$ is smooth of finite type over $S$. By separatedness the diagonal $\Delta: X\hookrightarrow X\times_S X$ is a [[closed subscheme|closed immersion of schemes]]; let $\mathcal{I}$ be the corresponding defining ideal sheaf (locally it is generated by the elements of the form $t\otimes 1 - 1\otimes t$, cf. [[Kähler differential]]). The definining ideal $\mathcal{I}^{n+1}$ defines for the $n$-th infinitesimal neighborhood $X^{(n)}$ and the diagonal subscheme $X\cong \Delta(X)\hookrightarrow X\times_S X$; there is a series of inclusions

$$
X\hookrightarrow X^{(1)}\hookrightarrow X^{(2)}\hookrightarrow \ldots \hookrightarrow X^{(\infty)}=\hat{X}
$$

where $\hat{X}$ is the completion (the corresponding [[formal scheme]]). Let $\mathcal{F}\to Sch$ be a [[Grothendieck fibration]] over the category of schemes (or the subcategory of the category of schemes containing all schemes in our consideration). For examples $\mathcal{F}$ can be the stack of [[quasicoherent sheaves]] of $\mathcal{O}$-modules. Consider now the projections $d_0,d_1:X\times_S X\to X$. A __Grothendieck connection__ on an object $\rho\in\mathcal{F}$ is a [[descent]] datum of the form $(\rho,\theta)$ where $\theta: d_0^*\rho\to d_1^*\rho$ is an isomorphism satisfying the cocycle (and the normalization) condition and such that the restriction (pullback along inclusion) on the diagonal is the identity.

The constructions can be almost literally transferred to the [[synthetic differential geometry]] using [[infinitesimal object|infinitesimal neighborhoods]] in that setup. 

More recently, some partial generalizations were found in purely algebraic framework. One could take any [[coring]] (or even an additive [[comonad]]) with a [[grouplike element]] and define corresponding connections and descent data and generalize the correspondence found by Grothendieck (see [[semi-free dga]] and Menini-Stefan reference below).

#Literature#

* P. Berthelot,  A. Ogus, _Notes on crystalline cohomology_, Princeton Univ. Press 1978. vi+243, ISBN0-691-08218-9 

* N. Katz, _Nilpotent connections and the monodromy theorem : applications of a result of Turrittin_, Publications Mathématiques de l'IHÉS, 39 (1970), p. 175-232  [numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=PMIHES_1970__39__175_0)

* wikipedia: [Grothendieck connection](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grothendieck_connection)

* B. Osserman, _Connections, curvature and $p$-curvature_, [pdf](http://www.math.ucdavis.edu/~osserman/math/connections.pdf) (expositional preprint) 

* C. Menini, D. Ştefan, _Descent theory and Amitsur cohomology of triples_, J. Algebra 266 (2003), no. 1, 261--304 (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0021-8693(03)00145-5">doi</a>). 

* T. Brzeziński, R. Wisbauer, _Corings and comodules_, London Math. Soc. Lec. Note Series 309, Cambridge 2003.



