#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


##The name

EGA stands for _Éléments de géométrie algébrique_ (Elements of algebraic geometry), which was written by [[Grothendieck]], with help of [[Jean Dieudonne|Jean Dieudonné]]. These volumes (and a list is given below) were among his many works attempting to build the foundations for [[algebraic geometry]]. They were preceded by FGA and were followed up by the SGA, more details of these can be found below.



##EGA

 _EGA_, written with help of [[Jean Dieudonne|Jean Dieudonné]]. This is a detailed exposition of scheme theory (note that our [[schemes]] in the nLab are what, in _EGA_, are  called preschemes; EGA's schemes are what we call separated schemes). 

The numbering of the chapters is nontrivial as there is a  chapter 0, the preliminaries, which continue at the beginning of various chapters.


The published part of _EGA_ is in Publ. IHÉS, now free online at [numdam](http://www.numdam.org/numdam-bin/recherche?au=Grothendieck&format=short) (detailed links to chapters, and their contents will be added here later, see also below for a list of the volumes in the series). We plan to list here the grand plan and some remarks and links. 

(The listing of contents is complicated by the existence of somewhat different reedition of _EGA I_ as a single book 1971, which complicated citations. )

###List of volumes of EGA
 
I. Le langage des schémas, 
Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 4 (1960), 5–228. Ch. 0.§1–7 ; Ch I.§1–10. 

II. Étude globale élémentaire de quelques classes de morphismes, 
Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 8 (1961), 5–222. Ch. II.§1–8.

III1. Étude cohomologique des faisceaux cohérents (Première partie) 
Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 11 (1961), 5–167. Ch. 0.§8–13 ; Ch.III.§1–5. 

III2. Étude cohomologique des faisceaux cohérents (Seconde partie) 
Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 17 (1963), 5–91. Ch. III .§6–7. 

IV1. Étude locale des schémas et des morphismes de schémas (Première partie) 
Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 20 (1964), 5–259. Ch.0.§14–23 ; Ch. IV.§1. 

IV2. Étude locale des schémas et des morphismes de schémas (Seconde partie) 
Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 24 (1965), 5–231. Ch. IV2.§2–7 . 

IV3. Étude locale des schémas et des morphismes de schémas (Troisième partie) 
Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 28 (1966), 5–255. Ch. IV.§8–15. 

IV4. Étude locale des schémas et des morphismes de schémas (Quatrième partie) 
Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 32 (1967), 5–361. Ch.IV.§16–21. 


##The other series:

###FGA (Fondements de la Géometrie Algébrique)

 The earliest of the series is _FGA_ written alone at the end of the 1950s; it is sort of quick outline of the theory and some deep results with proofs at the beginning of the period of the development of [[scheme theory]]. A modern version of the material in FGA appeared as a book [[FGA explained]] (ICTP, Trieste 2003--2005). The original is available [here](http://www.math.jussieu.fr/~leila/grothendieckcircle/FGA.pdf).


###SGA (Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois Marie)

(Bois Marie is the name of an area of woodland at Bures-sur-Yvette, where the [[math institutions|IHÉS]] is situated.)

 _SGA_ consists of the writeups of seminars at IHÉS lead by Grothendieck; the work of the members of the seminar under the guidance of Grothendieck are included. In $n$lab we have pages on  [[SGA1]], and [[SGA4]]. 

The [Wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S%C3%A9minaire_de_G%C3%A9om%C3%A9trie_Alg%C3%A9brique_du_Bois_Marie) lists all of the seminars.

##Beyond the SGAs

Both _EGA_ and _SGA_ were never completed. Part of the non-completed _EGA_ existed as Grothendieck's "prenotes", and a small part of them has been preserved and a little piece even published. Part of the unfinished plan of _SGA_ was attained in quick way by [[Pierre Deligne]] as _SGA $4\frac{1}{2}$_ (in other to justify preliminaries for his proof of the [[Weil conjecture]]s), of which Grothendieck did not approve.  

See also [[Daniel Murfet]]'s summary notes for various parts of _EGA_. 

##References

Apart from the texts themselves, there are Wikipedia entries on all three series.


[[!redirects SGA]]
[[!redirects FGA]]

category: reference