Term __classical physics__ usually denotes the part of [[physics]] which is based on exploring fundamental laws of nature which do not involve quantum mechanics; or in another point of view, today accepted areas of physics whose theoretical foundations in almost canonical form existed before the discovery of quantum mechanics. This includes [[classical mechanics]], continuum mechanics, [[classical electrodynamics]], magnetohydrodynamics, [[thermodynamics]], classical statistical mechanics, geometrical and wave optics and the areas of phenomena which can be explained using these. For example, due hi speeds quantum phenomena are surpressed in the study of plasma (e.g. research on fusion). 

Mathematically, classical mechanics is a rather special case of the theory of dynamical systems.  

Depending on context, relativity theory (both special and general) is or is not included in classical physics. In Lagrangean approach, relativity can be introduced as a special case of classical mechanical system. However, the classical electrodynamics ([[Maxwell equations]]) is implicitly also a relativistic theory, even if it was originally described in a way hiding this fact. 

Early (pre-quantum) theories which are generally rejected even in non-quantum regime, for example the theory of universe based on the concept of ether do not usually count into the classical physics. In the case of ether, the deciding role has been played by the appearance of relativity theory and the experiments supporting it. 