__Note.__  This page records the basic definitions of graph theory that have some degree of prevalence in the field that goes by that name.  Many directions of abstraction and augmentation are no doubt obvious, but it is useful to start from these.

+--{: .query}
At [[latest changes]], [[Jon Awbrey]] introduced this page with:

> The page on [[graph]] has become too baroque to fix, but there needs to be a place to record the basic definitions of graph theory that are actually used by the larger schools of math folks who actually dare to call themselves graph theorists.

[[Mike Shulman]]: I don't think starting a new page that duplicates the intent of a previous one because one doesn't like the organization or approach of the previous one is a good idea.  Instead, let's have a discussion -- at [[graph]], where it belongs -- about what (you think) is wrong with it and how we can fix it.

I think the page called "graph theory" should be about the field in general, like the pages called [[category theory]] and [[topology]].  Definitions of individual concepts should be on their respective pages.
=--

## Graph ##

Frank Harary’s classical _Graph Theory_ defines the concept of a graph &mdash; and much of its conceptual neighborhood &mdash; in the following manner:

: A _graph_ $G$ consists of a finite nonempty set $V = V(G)$ of $p$ _points_ together with a prescribed set $X$ of $q$ unordered pairs of distinct points of $V$.  Each pair $x = \{ u, v \}$ of points in $X$ is a _line_ of $G$, and $x$ is said to _join_ $u$ and $v$.  We write $x = u v$ and say that $u$ and $v$ are _adjacent points_ (sometimes denoted $u \:\mathop{adj} v$);  point $u$ and line $x$ are _incident_ with each other, as are $v$ and $x$.  If two distinct lines $x$ and $y$ are incident with a common point, then they are _adjacent lines_.  A graph with $p$ points and $q$ lines is called a _$(p, q)$ graph_.  The (1,0) graph is _trivial_.  (Harary, 1969, p.&nbsp;9).

## References ##

* Harary, F. (1969), _Graph Theory_, Addison-Wesley.

* Harary, F. and Palmer, E.M. (1973), _Graphical Enumeration_, Academic Press.

* Lambek, J. and Scott, P.J. (1986), _Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic_, Cambridge University Press.