## Idea

A barycentric algebra is a set equipped with a notion of taking weighted averages, or convex-linear combinations, of its elements.


## Definition

A __barycentric algebra__ is a [[set]] $X$ equipped with,

*  for each [[real number]] $p$ such that $0 \leq p \leq 1$, an operation $c_p: X \times X \to X$,

such that the following identities always hold:

*  $c_0(a,b) = b$,
*  $c_1(a,b) = a$,
*  $c_p(a,a) = a$,
*  $c_p(a,b) = c_{1-p}(b,a)$,
*  $c_p(c_q(a,b),c) = c_{p q}(a,c_r(b,c))$ for $(1 - p q)r = (1 - q)p$.

This defines barycentric algebras as a [[variety of algebras]], with one binary operation for each $p$.

The intended interpretation is that $c_p(a,b)$ is the average of $a$ and $b$, with $a$ given the weight $p$ and $b$ given the weight $1 - p$; this is called the __$p$-weighted average__ of $a$ and $b$.  It is also possible to give an '[[bias|unbiased]]' definition, in which the most general operation is an $n$-ary operation parametrised by a list $(p_1,\ldots,p_n)$ such that $0 \leq p_i \leq 1$ for each $i$ and $\sum_{i = 1}^n p_i = 1$.  Such an operation is called a __convex-linear combination__.


## Examples

Any real [[vector space]] is a barycentric algebra, with $c_p(a,b) = p a + (1 - p) b$.  In the unbiased version, any convex-linear combination is a linear combination.  Note that a barycentric homomorphism between vector spaces may not be a linear map, since it may not preserve the identity; thus, a vector space is a barycentric algebra with [[extra structure]].

More generally, any real [[affine space]] is a barycentric algebra; since $p + (1 - p) = 1$, the expression for $c_p$ in a vector space is valid in an affine space.  In the unbiased version, any convex linear combination is an affine linear combination.  Now any barycentric homomorphism between affine spaces is an affine linear map (and conversely); an affine space is a barycentric algebra with [[extra properties]].

Still more generally, any convex subset of a real affine space is a barycentric algebra (again with extra properties).

The [[Boolean domain]] $\{0,1\}$ is a barycentric algebra with $c_p(a,b) = a \vee b = a + b - a b$ whenever $0 \lt p \lt 1$ (with $c_0(a,b) = b$ and $c_1(a,b) = 0$ as always); this cannot be realised as a subset of a vector space.  (It would be nice to find an example like this that can be defined constructively; this one relies on [[excluded middle]].)


## Abstract convex sets

There is a nice abstract converse to the example of a convex subset of an affine space.  A barycentric algebra is __cancellative__ if $a = b$ whenever $c_p(a,c) = c_p(b,c)$ for some $c$ and $p \gt 0$.  We may call a cancellative barycentric algebra an __abstract convex set__ (or maybe a _convex space_ or a _convex algebra_).  The justification for this terminology is this
+-- {: .un_theorem}
###### Theorem

A barycentric algebra is cancellative if and only if it is isomorphic (as a barcyentric algebra) to a convex subset of some real affine space.
=--

Compare this with the theorem that a [[monoid]] is cancellative if and only if it is isomorphic to a submonoid of some [[group]].

+--{: .query}
[[Mike Shulman]]: What are some examples of non-cancellative barycentric algebras?

_Toby_:  The last example in the list above: $\{0,1\}$ with $c_p(a,b) = a \vee b$ whenever $0 \lt p \lt 1$; this generalises to any nontrivial [[semilattice]].  I don\'t know any better examples.
=--


## References

References tend to define $c_p$ only for $0 \lt p \lt 1$, but it seems obvious that it\'s best to include the edge cases as well.  Classically, it makes no difference, but the definition above is probably better in [[constructive mathematics]].

*  _[[HAF]]_, Section 12.7 (short and to the point).

*  Romanowska, Smith, Orłowska; Abstract barycentric algebras; [pdf](http://staff.science.uva.nl/~gfontain/tacl09-abstracts/tacl2009_submission_48.pdf).  This generalises from $[0,1]$ to an arbitrary $L \Pi$-algebra ($L$ for 'Łukasiewicz', $\Pi$ for 'product', so think of $[0,1]$ as a space of fuzzy truth values).