
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Classical mechanics is that part of [[classical physics]] dealing with the deterministic physics of point [[particle]]s and rigid bodies; often the systems with the infinitely many degrees of freedom are also included (like infinite arrays of particles and their continuous limits like classical mechanics of strings, membranes, elastic media and of classical fields). For the continuous systems, the equations of motion can often be explained by the partial differential equations, describing classical [[physical field]]s of quantities (typically smooth possibly vector valued functions on manifolds), including background fields like metric; the latter (sub)area is the [[classical field theory]], but it is often studied separately from the classical mechanics of the finite systems of particles; especially if non-classical features or interpretations are involved (e.g. supersymmetry, or unusual case of non-variational  equations of motion etc.). In Hamiltonian reduction, due conservation laws, many systems with infinitely many degrees of freedom, reduce to the finite ones. 

Nondissipative systems with finitely many degrees of freedom may be described geometrically using [[symplectic manifolds]], or more generally [[Poisson manifolds]]; the later may also sometimes appear as reductions of the systems with infinitely many degrees of freedom. 

Classical mechanics of a system of point particles and rigid bodies is usually divided into statics, kinematics and dynamics. __Statics__ studies the balance of forces in a system which does not move, or in a stationary flow. __Kinematics__ studies the relation between position, velocity and acceleration of bodies in a mechanical system, without reference to the causes of motion. __Dynamics__ studies motion with reference to the causes of motion and interaction between bodies and its manifestation via (quantified) [[force]]s, energy and mass assigned to bodies in motion and interaction.

For a theoretical classical mechanics one often starts with a concrete system of bodies with pulleys, strings, spins, external and internal forces, and dissipative sinks and sources (e.g. friction forces), which are then analysed to get the configuration or phase space of the system, the equations of motion and possibly to determine some special [[observable]]s of interest. Once abstracted that way, the rest of the study is a rather special case of the theory of [[dynamical system]]s, which itself studies general (either deterministic or stochastic) spatially-parametrized systems in a (discrete or continuous) time evolution. 

## Definition

Eventually there wil be a discussion here that starts with something like:

The [[category]] of classical physical systems is the [[opposite category]] of real [[Poisson algebra]]s.

In nice cases these come from [[symplectic manifold]]s. See also there for more details.

## References

* [[Klaas Landsman]], _[[Mathematical Topics Between Classical and Quantum Mechanics]]_
