pages/2368.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
#### Higher algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--





#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

A _symmetric smash product of spectra_ is a realization of the [[smash product of spectra]] such as to make a [[symmetric monoidal category|symmetric]] [[monoidal model category]] [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presentation]] of the [[symmetric monoidal (infinity,1)-category of spectra]]. 

In [[higher algebra]] and [[stable homotopy theory]] one is interested in [[monoid in a monoidal (∞,1)-category|monoid objects]] in the [[stable (∞,1)-category of spectra]] -- called $A_\infty$-[[A-∞-ring|rings]] -- and [[commutative monoid in an (infinity,1)-category|commutative monoid objects]] -- called $E_\infty$-[[E-∞-ring|rings]]. These monoid objects satisfy associativity, uniticity and, in the $E_\infty$-case, commutativity up to [[coherence|coherent]] [[higher homotopies]]. 

For concretely working with these objects, it is often useful to have concrete  [[category theory|1-categorical]] algebraic models for these intricate [[higher category theory|higher categorical]]/homotopical entities. The _symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra_ is a structure that allows to model [[A-infinity rings]] as ordinary [[monoids]] and [[E-infinity rings]] as ordinary [[commutative monoids]] in a suitable ordinary [[category]] -- one speaks of _[[highly structured ring spectra]]_.

Historically, this had been desired but out of reach for a long time. When the relevant [[highly structured ring spectra]] were finally found, the relief was substantial and led to terminology such as "[[brave new algebra]]". More recently maybe the term [[higher algebra]] is becoming more popular.

Then, model structures were found which also admit symmetric monoidal smash products, but which are not of the form "highly structured spectra": [[model structure for excisive functors]].

## Prehistory

As a first step one wants a [[model category of spectra]] $\mathcal{S}$ that [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presents]] the full [[(infinity,1)-category of spectra]]. This allows to model the notion of [[equivalence]] of spectra and of [[homotopies]] between maps of spectra.  Several such model categories 
have been known for a long time; all are Quillen equivalent and their common [[homotopy category]] is called "the" [[stable homotopy category]] $Ho \mathcal{S}$.

It was also known that the [[stable homotopy category]] $Ho \mathcal{S}$ is a [[symmetric monoidal category]], via a "[[derived functor|derived]] [[smash product of spectra]]."  Ordinary (commutative) [[monoids]] in $Ho \mathcal{S}$ were called (commutative) **[[ring spectrum|ring spectra]]**.  While their product has associativity and uniticity up to homotopy, these homotopies are not specified and not required to satisfy higher coherence laws up to higher homotopies themselves (see at _[[H-space]]_).

One could, however, build in [[coherence|coherent]] associativity (resp. commutativity) homotopies by the use of an [[operad]], by using an $A_\infty$-operad (resp. an $E_\infty$-operad).  This resulted in the notions of **$A_\infty$-[[A-infinity-ring|ring spectrum]]** and **$E_\infty$-[[E-infinity-ring|ring spectrum]]**, which have a much better-behaved theory.

## Symmetric monoidal categories of spectra

Now, for some of the model categories $\mathcal{S}$ of spectra, the smash product on $Ho \mathcal{S}$ can be lifted to a functor
$$
  \wedge\colon \mathcal{S} \times \mathcal{S} \to \mathcal{S}
  \,,
$$
but for the most part these functors were neither associative nor unital nor commutative at the level of the 1-category $\mathcal{S}$.  In fact ([Lewis 91](#Lewis91)) proved a theorem that there could be *no* symmetric monoidal category $\mathcal{S}$ modeling the stable homotopy category and satisfying a couple of other natural requirements.

However, in the 1990s it was realized that by dropping one or another of Lewis' other requirements, symmetric monoidal categories of spectra could be produced.  The first such category was the category of **[[S-module]]s** described by [Elmendorf-Kriz-Mandell-May 97](#ElmendorfKrizMandellMay97), but others soon followed, including **[[symmetric spectra]]** and **[[orthogonal spectra]]**.  All of these form symmetric [[monoidal model categories]] which are symmetric-monoidally [[Quillen equivalence|Quillen equivalent]].

Moreover, in all of these cases, the monoidal structure on the model category $\mathcal{S}$ absorbs all the higher coherent homotopies that used to be supplied by the action of an $A_\infty$ or $E_\infty$ operad.  Thus, honest (commutative) monoids in $\mathcal{S}$ model the same "(commutative) ring objects up to all coherent higher homotopies" that are modeled by the classical $A_\infty$ and $E_\infty$ ring spectra, and for this reason they are often still referred to as $A_\infty$ or $E_\infty$ ring spectra, respectively.

### $S$-modules

The construction of [[S-modules]] by EKMM begins with the notion of [[coordinate-free spectrum|coordinate free Lewis-May spectra]].  Using the [[linear isometries operad]], one can construct a [[monad]] $\mathbb{L}$ on the category $\mathcal{S}$ of such spectra, and the category of $\mathbb{L}$-algebras is a well-behaved model for the stable homotopy category, and moreover admits a smash product which is associative up to isomorphism, but unital only up to weak equivalence.  However, the subcategory of the $\mathbb{L}$-algebras for which the unit transformations are isomorphisms is again a well-behaved model for $Ho \mathbb{S}$, which is moreover symmetric monoidal.

Since the unit transformation is of the form $S\wedge E \to E$, where $S$ is the [[sphere spectrum]], and this map looks like the action of a ring on a module, the objects of this subcategory are called **$S$-modules** and the category is called $Mod_S$.  The intuition is that just as an abelian group is a [[module]] over the archetypical ring $\mathbb{Z}$ of [[integer|integers]], a spectrum should be regarded as a module over the archetypal ring spectrum, namely the sphere spectrum.

Similarly, just as an ordinary [[ring]] is a [[monoid]] in the category $Mod_\mathbb{Z}$ of $\mathbb{Z}$-[[module]]s, i.e. a $\mathbb{Z}$-algebra, an $A_\infty$ or $E_\infty$ ring spectrum is a (possibly commutative) monoid in the category of $S$-modules, and thus referred to as an **$S$-algebra**.  More generally, for any $A_\infty$-[[A-infinity-ring|ring spectrum]] $R$, there is a notion of $R$-[[module]] spectra forming a category $Mod_R$, which in turn carries an associative and commutative smash product $\wedge_R$ and a [[model category]] structure on $Mod_R$ such that $\wedge_R$ becomes unital in the [[homotopy category]].  All this is such that an $A_\infty$-[[A-infinity-algebra|algebra]] over $R$ is a [[monoid object]] in $(Mod_R, \wedge_R)$.  Similarly $E_\infty$-[[E-infinity-algebra|algebras]] are commutative monoid objects in $(Mod_R, \wedge_R)$.

### Symmetric spectra

* [[symmetric spectrum]]

### Orthogonal spectra

* [[orthogonal spectrum]]

## Related concepts

* [[mapping spectrum]]

* [[functor with smash product]]

[[model structure on spectra]]

* [[symmetric spectrum]], [[model structure on symmetric spectra]]

* [[orthogonal spectrum]], [[model structure on orthogonal spectra]]

* [[S-module]], [[model structure on S-modules]]

Also the

* [[model structure for excisive functors]]

carries a symmetric monoida smash product.

## References

### Original sources

The original no-go theorem for a well-behave smash product of spectra is 

* {#Lewis91} [[Gaunce Lewis]], _Is there a conveinient category of spectra?_, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra Volume 73, Issue 3, 30 August 1991, Pages 233–246

In the mid-1990s, several categories of spectra with nice smash products were discovered, and simultaneously, model categories experienced a major renaissance. 

The definition of $S$-modules and their theory originates in

* {#ElmendorfKrizMandellMay97} [[Anthony Elmendorf]], [[Igor Kriz]], [[Michael Mandell]], [[Peter May]], _Rings, modules and algebras in stable homotopy theory_, AMS 1997, 2014 (aka "EKMM")

and around 1993 [[Jeff Smith]] gave the first talks about symmetric spectra; the details of the model structure were later worked out and written up in 

* [[Mark Hovey]], [[Brooke Shipley]], [[Jeff Smith]], _Symmetric spectra_, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 13 (2000), 149-208.


### Reviews and introductions


A survey of the general theory, also of its history, is

* [[Anthony Elmendorf]], [[Igor Kriz]], [[Peter May]], _[[Modern foundations for stable homotopy theory]]_,1995 ([pdf](http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/Elmendorf-Kriz-May/modern_foundations.pdf))

A textbook account of the theory of symmetric spectra is  

* [[Stefan Schwede]], _Symmetric spectra_ ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/~schwede/SymSpec-v3.pdf))

Seminar notes on symmetric spectra are in

* [[Sander Kupers]], _[[SymmetricSpectra.pdf:file]]_

See also

* wikipedia [highly structured ring spectrum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Highly_structured_ring_spectrum)


[[!redirects symmetric monoidal category of spectra]]
[[!redirects symmetric monoidal categories of spectra]]


[[!redirects structured ring spectrum]]
[[!redirects structured ring spectra]]


[[!redirects symmetric smash products of spectra]]

[[!redirects symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]]

[[!redirects symmetric smash product on spectra]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 105705 Revision date: 2016-02-16 09:05:30 Page name: symmetric smash product of spectra Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 217.39.7.254

pages/2368.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
#### Higher algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

A _symmetric smash product of spectra_ is a realization of the [[smash product of spectra]] such as to make a [[symmetric monoidal category|symmetric]] [[monoidal model category]] [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presentation]] of the [[symmetric monoidal (infinity,1)-category of spectra]]. 

In [[higher algebra]] and [[stable homotopy theory]] one is interested in [[monoid in a monoidal (∞,1)-category|monoid objects]] in the [[stable (∞,1)-category of spectra]] -- called $A_\infty$-[[A-∞-ring|rings]] -- and [[commutative monoid in an (infinity,1)-category|commutative monoid objects]] -- called $E_\infty$-[[E-∞-ring|rings]]. These monoid objects satisfy associativity, uniticity and, in the $E_\infty$-case, commutativity up to [[coherence|coherent]] [[higher homotopies]]. 

For concretely working with these objects, it is often useful to have concrete  [[category theory|1-categorical]] algebraic models for these intricate [[higher category theory|higher categorical]]/homotopical entities. The _symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra_ is a structure that allows to model [[A-infinity rings]] as ordinary [[monoids]] and [[E-infinity rings]] as ordinary [[commutative monoids]] in a suitable ordinary [[category]] -- one speaks of _[[highly structured ring spectra]]_.

Historically, this had been desired but out of reach for a long time. When the relevant [[highly structured ring spectra]] were finally found, the relief was substantial and led to terminology such as "[[brave new algebra]]". More recently maybe the term [[higher algebra]] is becoming more popular.

Then, model structures were found which also admit symmetric monoidal smash products, but which are not of the form "highly structured spectra": [[model structure for excisive functors]].

## Prehistory

As a first step one wants a [[model category of spectra]] $\mathcal{S}$ that [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presents]] the full [[(infinity,1)-category of spectra]]. This allows to model the notion of [[equivalence]] of spectra and of [[homotopies]] between maps of spectra.  Several such model categories 
have been known for a long time; all are Quillen equivalent and their common [[homotopy category]] is called "the" [[stable homotopy category]] $Ho \mathcal{S}$.

It was also known that the [[stable homotopy category]] $Ho \mathcal{S}$ is a [[symmetric monoidal category]], via a "[[derived functor|derived]] [[smash product of spectra]]."  Ordinary (commutative) [[monoids]] in $Ho \mathcal{S}$ were called (commutative) **[[ring spectrum|ring spectra]]**.  While their product has associativity and uniticity up to homotopy, these homotopies are not specified and not required to satisfy higher coherence laws up to higher homotopies themselves (see at _[[H-space]]_).

One could, however, build in [[coherence|coherent]] associativity (resp. commutativity) homotopies by the use of an [[operad]], by using an $A_\infty$-operad (resp. an $E_\infty$-operad).  This resulted in the notions of **$A_\infty$-[[A-infinity-ring|ring spectrum]]** and **$E_\infty$-[[E-infinity-ring|ring spectrum]]**, which have a much better-behaved theory.

## Symmetric monoidal categories of spectra

Now, for some of the model categories $\mathcal{S}$ of spectra, the smash product on $Ho \mathcal{S}$ can be lifted to a functor
$$
  \wedge\colon \mathcal{S} \times \mathcal{S} \to \mathcal{S}
  \,,
$$
but for the most part these functors were neither associative nor unital nor commutative at the level of the 1-category $\mathcal{S}$.  In fact ([Lewis 91](#Lewis91)) proved a theorem that there could be *no* symmetric monoidal category $\mathcal{S}$ modeling the stable homotopy category and satisfying a couple of other natural requirements.

However, in the 1990s it was realized that by dropping one or another of Lewis' other requirements, symmetric monoidal categories of spectra could be produced.  The first such category was the category of **[[S-module]]s** described by [Elmendorf-Kriz-Mandell-May 97](#ElmendorfKrizMandellMay97), but others soon followed, including **[[symmetric spectra]]** and **[[orthogonal spectra]]**.  All of these form symmetric [[monoidal model categories]] which are symmetric-monoidally [[Quillen equivalence|Quillen equivalent]].

Moreover, in all of these cases, the monoidal structure on the model category $\mathcal{S}$ absorbs all the higher coherent homotopies that used to be supplied by the action of an $A_\infty$ or $E_\infty$ operad.  Thus, honest (commutative) monoids in $\mathcal{S}$ model the same "(commutative) ring objects up to all coherent higher homotopies" that are modeled by the classical $A_\infty$ and $E_\infty$ ring spectra, and for this reason they are often still referred to as $A_\infty$ or $E_\infty$ ring spectra, respectively.

### $S$-modules

The construction of [[S-modules]] by EKMM begins with the notion of [[coordinate-free spectrum|coordinate free Lewis-May spectra]].  Using the [[linear isometries operad]], one can construct a [[monad]] $\mathbb{L}$ on the category $\mathcal{S}$ of such spectra, and the category of $\mathbb{L}$-algebras is a well-behaved model for the stable homotopy category, and moreover admits a smash product which is associative up to isomorphism, but unital only up to weak equivalence.  However, the subcategory of the $\mathbb{L}$-algebras for which the unit transformations are isomorphisms is again a well-behaved model for $Ho \mathbb{S}$, which is moreover symmetric monoidal.

Since the unit transformation is of the form $S\wedge E \to E$, where $S$ is the [[sphere spectrum]], and this map looks like the action of a ring on a module, the objects of this subcategory are called **$S$-modules** and the category is called $Mod_S$.  The intuition is that just as an abelian group is a [[module]] over the archetypical ring $\mathbb{Z}$ of [[integer|integers]], a spectrum should be regarded as a module over the archetypal ring spectrum, namely the sphere spectrum.

Similarly, just as an ordinary [[ring]] is a [[monoid]] in the category $Mod_\mathbb{Z}$ of $\mathbb{Z}$-[[module]]s, i.e. a $\mathbb{Z}$-algebra, an $A_\infty$ or $E_\infty$ ring spectrum is a (possibly commutative) monoid in the category of $S$-modules, and thus referred to as an **$S$-algebra**.  More generally, for any $A_\infty$-[[A-infinity-ring|ring spectrum]] $R$, there is a notion of $R$-[[module]] spectra forming a category $Mod_R$, which in turn carries an associative and commutative smash product $\wedge_R$ and a [[model category]] structure on $Mod_R$ such that $\wedge_R$ becomes unital in the [[homotopy category]].  All this is such that an $A_\infty$-[[A-infinity-algebra|algebra]] over $R$ is a [[monoid object]] in $(Mod_R, \wedge_R)$.  Similarly $E_\infty$-[[E-infinity-algebra|algebras]] are commutative monoid objects in $(Mod_R, \wedge_R)$.

### Symmetric spectra

* [[symmetric spectrum]]

### Orthogonal spectra

* [[orthogonal spectrum]]

## Related concepts

* [[mapping spectrum]]

* [[functor with smash product]]

[[model structure on spectra]]

* [[symmetric spectrum]], [[model structure on symmetric spectra]]

* [[orthogonal spectrum]], [[model structure on orthogonal spectra]]

* [[S-module]], [[model structure on S-modules]]

Also the

* [[model structure for excisive functors]]

carries a symmetric monoida smash product.

## References

### Original sources

The original no-go theorem for a well-behave smash product of spectra is 

* {#Lewis91} [[Gaunce Lewis]], _Is there a conveinient category of spectra?_, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra Volume 73, Issue 3, 30 August 1991, Pages 233–246

In the mid-1990s, several categories of spectra with nice smash products were discovered, and simultaneously, model categories experienced a major renaissance. 

The definition of [[S-modules]] and their theory originates in

* {#ElmendorfKrizMandellMay97} [[Anthony Elmendorf]], [[Igor Kriz]], [[Michael Mandell]], [[Peter May]], _Rings, modules and algebras in stable homotopy theory_, AMS 1997, 2014 (aka "EKMM")

and around 1993 [[Jeff Smith]] gave the first talks about symmetric spectra; the details of the model structure were later worked out and written up in 

* [[Mark Hovey]], [[Brooke Shipley]], [[Jeff Smith]], _Symmetric spectra_, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 13 (2000), 149-208.

Discussion that makes the [[Day convolution]] structure on the symmetric smash product of spectra manifest is in

* {#MMSS00} [[Michael Mandell]], [[Peter May]], [[Stefan Schwede]], [[Brooke Shipley]], part III of _Model Categories of Diagram Spectra_, Proceedings London Mathematical Society Volume 82, Issue 2, 2000 ([pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/PAPERS/mmssLMSDec30.pdf), [publisher](http://plms.oxfordjournals.org/content/82/2/441.short?rss=1&ssource=mfc))


### Reviews and introductions


A survey of the general theory, also of its history, is

* [[Anthony Elmendorf]], [[Igor Kriz]], [[Peter May]], _[[Modern foundations for stable homotopy theory]]_,1995 ([pdf](http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/Elmendorf-Kriz-May/modern_foundations.pdf))

A textbook account of the theory of symmetric spectra is  

* [[Stefan Schwede]], _Symmetric spectra_ ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/~schwede/SymSpec-v3.pdf))

Seminar notes on symmetric spectra are in

* [[Sander Kupers]], _[[SymmetricSpectra.pdf:file]]_

See also

* wikipedia [highly structured ring spectrum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Highly_structured_ring_spectrum)


[[!redirects symmetric monoidal category of spectra]]
[[!redirects symmetric monoidal categories of spectra]]


[[!redirects structured ring spectrum]]
[[!redirects structured ring spectra]]


[[!redirects symmetric smash products of spectra]]

[[!redirects symmetric monoidal smash product of spectra]]

[[!redirects symmetric smash product on spectra]]
