[[!include all changes]]

A list of all recently edited entries can be seen here:

* [Recently Revised](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/recently_revised).

But that list tends to contain lots of minor changes: it's not easy to spot the important ones.

So, if you feel people's attention should be drawn to some changes you make, please mention them *here*.  That will help [[Contributors|the rest of us]] spot them, so we can learn what you know --- and maybe make further improvements!

These comments should go in _reverse_ chronological order, so that the latest are on top of the list. To keep the list international, use the date in UTC (the date given by the server for your edits).

***

# 2009-06-26 #

*  [[Eric Forgy]] has a request at [[notation]].

*  [[David Roberts]]: created [[fibration theory]]. Also a comment at [[gerbe (general idea)]] about the fibration theory axioms.

# 2009-06-25 #

* [[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: Recently [[loop space]] was created. Also, I added some examples to [[Chu construction]] and to [[star-autonomous category]]. 

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: 

  * added the example of principal bundles to [[fibration sequence]]

  * added an example section to [[group cohomology]] with details of how the abstract-nonsense definition reproduces the familiar formulas

  * created [[twisted cohomology]]

  * created [[n-group]]

  * created [[group cohomology]]

    * the point of view adopted there is _almost_ fully explicit in Brown-Higgins-Sivera's book _Nonabelian algebraic topology_ , only that one needs to notice in addition that the morphisms out of free resolutions of crossed complexes discusses there are the [[anafunctor]]s that compute the morphisms in the corresponding homotopy category. Has this been made fully explicit anywhere in the existing literature?


  * fiddled a bit with the entry [[higher category theory]] (added one more introductory sentence, created a hyperlinked list of definitions of higher categories) but I still feel that we should put more energy in this particular entry. It is sort of the single central entry one would expect an "$n$Lab" to be built around, but currently it doesn't even come close to living up to playing such a pivotal role. I am imagining that it should carry some paragraphs that highlight the powerful recent developments in view of [[Pursuing Stacks]], of the kind that I filled in today in the entry [[Carlos Simpson]]. Does any higher category theory expert out there feel like writing an expositional piece for the $n$Lab here?

  * created [[simplicial localization]] but was then too lazy to draw the hammock. But main point here is the link to an article by [[Tim Porter]] that nicely collects all the relevant definitions and references 

    * there is plenty of further material by [[Tim Porter]] that should eventually be referenced at various $(\infty,1)$-categorical entries. By chance I just came across the slides [Weak categories](http://www.ima.umn.edu/talks/workshops/SP6.7-18.04/may/PorterMay.pdf) which I now linked to from [[weak omega-category]] and [[higher category theory]] 

  * created [[principal infinity-bundle]], just for completeness

  * created [[principal 2-bundle]] -- this is just the result of what came to mind while typing, I am sure to have forgotten and misrepresented crucial aspects. [[Toby Bartels]] should please have a critical look and modify as necessary, as should [[Igor Bakovic]] and [[Christoph Wockel]] in case they are reading this. 

  * based on a reaction I received concerning my comment below on the entry [[gerbe]] I have split the material into entries [[gerbe (as a stack)]], [[gerbe (general idea)]], [[bundle gerbe]] and kept at [[gerbe]] only pointers to these entries -- let me know what you think

  * created an entry for [[Carlos Simpson]] motivated by a link to a recent [pdf note](http://math.unice.fr/~carlos/slides/ihesAGjan09.pdf) -- that [[Zoran Skoda]] kindly pointed me to --  where Simpson briefly sketches the topic of higher stacks, old and recent progress and putting his own contribution into context. I thought that was a nice short comprehensive collection of keywords and so I reproduce that text now at the entry [[Carlos Simpson]] with all the keywords hyperlinked

  * created [[fibration sequence]]

  * added an "Idea"-section to [[gerbe]] supposed to be read as "general idea", where I try to describe the concept in a way independent of the notion of stack, relating it to princpal bundles, principal $\infty$-bundles, fibration sequences and cohomology . At the end I say "in the following we spell out concrete realization of this idea". Then I made [[Tim Porter]]'s material a section "Realization of gerbes as stacks". Eventually I'd like to add similarly "Realization of gerbes as Stasheff-Wirth fibrations", "Realization of gerbes as bundle gerbes" etc.

    * I hope that this is okay with you all, in particular I hope that [[Tim Porter|Tim]] doesn't mind me putting such a chunk of material in front of his work. If anyone has the impression that the chunk I added should rather be separated to a different entry, I'll have no objections. But please have a look first to see what I am trying to get at.
* [[Tim Porter|Tim]]: 

   * I have added material to [[gerbe]], although it is still a long way from explaining the link with cohomology with integer coefficients that was requested.

   * In the process of doing the above I have added a deconstruction section to [[torsor]], and created [[trivial torsor]].

   *  I created a brief entry on [[Jean-Luc Brylinski]], but this is really a stub with a link to Wikipedia.


# 2009-06-24 #
* [[Finn Lawler]]: Added a proof (sketch) of the 'lax Yoneda lemma' to [[lax natural transformation]].  Also replied re terminology at [[modification]] (thanks to Urs for a fantastic reply to my question there).

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: created [[Hochschild-Serre spectral sequence]].

* [[Eric Forgy|Eric]]: I've started the process of applying redirects for symbolic links. This maintains the original ascii titles and urls, but makes links look much better. I've also started adding redirects for plural nouns, e.g. you no longer have to type <nowiki>[[category|categories]]</nowiki>. Now you can simply type <nowiki>[[categories]]</nowiki> and will be redirected automatically to [[category]]. To see the changes in action, have a look at [[higher category theory]]. Feedback welcome!

* [[Zoran Škoda]]:  Created [[Hopf envelope]], [[free Hopf algebra]] and [[matrix Hopf algebra]] simultaneously with posting a related comment to a discussion between Baez, Trimble and Vicary on free and cofree functors for bialgebras. 

* [[Tim Porter|Tim]]:  I have created a stub on [[gerbe|gerbes]].  There was a request on the Café for en entry and I thought this was a good way to remind me to start one.  ... but feel free to do it for me!

* [[Zoran Škoda]]:

  * Created [[class of adapted objects]]. It would be better to say class of objects adapted to a functor (we talk half exact additive functors between abelian categories). Created [[Grothendieck spectral sequence]] and [[spectral sequence]]. Both need more input/work...

  * I have added a general paragraph at the beginning of [[descent]] because far not all the cases of descent theory fit into the framework of sheaf/stack theory, Grothendieck topologies and homotopical methods. Namely something is a sheaf when it satisfies the descent for all covers, but there are cases when one considers just the descent problem for a single morphism, not all morphisms of anything like a Grothendieck topology. There is also a descent along families of noncommutative localizations, when one needs to resort to noncommutative generalizations of Grothendieck topologies. So descent theory is more general than the geometry of sheaves and stacks, though the latter is surely he most important part. 

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: 

  * created [[K-theory spectrum]] with just a question

  * created a stub for [[tmf]] based on a recent Category Theory mailing list contribution  -- am thinking that we should more generally try to move good stuff from the mailing list into $n$Lab entries

  * created [[Eilenberg-MacLane space]], [[Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum]]

  * am offering a reply to [[Finn Lawler]] at [[modification]]

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Just more questions, instead of answers, for Finn and Gavin.


# 2009-06-23 #

*  [[Gavin Wraith]] wrote [[matrix theory]], [[tensor product theory]], and [[bimodel]], with a question at the last.

* [[Finn Lawler]]: created [[modification]] (and asked a question there) and [[lax natural transformation]], including a statement of what I think is the Yoneda lemma for them.  I have a proof (I think), which I'll add a sketch of later, if no-one finds the statement obviously wrong in the meantime.

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]

  * added to [[weak factorization system]] the full details of the (elementary) proof that morphisms defined by a right lifting property are stable under pullback -- 

  * added the theorem to [[Kan fibration]] that Kan fibrations between Kan complexes that are also weak equivalences are precisely those with the right lifting property with respect to simplex boundary inclusions

  * added example of fundamental $\infty$-groupoid = singular simplicial complex to [[Kan complex]]

  * edited [[Kan complex]] slightly and added two little propositions characterizing groupoids in terms of their Kan complex nerves

  * added further illustrations to [[Kan fibration]]

# 2009-06-22 #

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  A section on [[measurable space]] about the constructive theory due to Cheng.  (This is *not* a straightforward variation on the classical theory but distinctly a generalisation, so may be of interest even to classical mathematicians.)

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]] linked to [[normal complex of groups]] by a little lemma now added to [[Moore complex]]

* [[Tim Porter]] added [[normal complex of groups]]

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]:

  * worked on [[simplicial group]]:

    * added section about the adjunction between simplicial groups and simplicial sets, in particular mentioning the free simplicial abelian group functor (since that plays a role in the proof at [[abelian sheaf cohomology]], which now links to it)


    * moved statement and proof that every simplicial group is a Kan complex into a formal theorem-proof environment

    * added references to Goerss-Jardine, to [[Tim Porter]]'s [[Tim Porter:crossed menagerie|Crossed Menagerie]] and to Peter May's book "Simplicial objects in algebraic topology"

    * added an "Idea" section 

  * added to [[Moore complex]]

    * the theorem of how it relates to the other two complexes in the game (it is quasi-isomorphic to the alternating sum complex and isomorphic to that divided by degeneracies)

    * illustrations of cells in low degree

    * the reference to [[Tim Porter]]'s [[Tim Porter:crossed menagerie|The Crossed Menagerie]] notes

    * a brief comment on use of terminology (after checking with [[Tim Porter]])

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Started more articles that I\'d linked earlier: [[exclusive disjunction]] (with a philosophical claim that I need to back up), [[countable choice]] (very much a stub), [[sigma-ideal]], [[Hartog's number]].

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: 

  * added the detailed formal proof to [[abelian sheaf cohomology]] that shows how it is sitting as a special case inside the more conceptual [[nonabelian cohomology]] (= hom-sets of [[infinity-stack]]s, really)

    * in this context I also rewrote the "Idea" section in the desire to drive home the main point better, but without removing the previous material. As a result the text of the entry is now somewhat repetitive, I am afraid. Maybe a little later, when I have more distance to it, I'll try to trim it down again. Or else, maybe one of you feels like polishing it.

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Wrote [[Moore closure]], since I linked it and it\'s a neat idea.  As I was writing it, I realised that it was more abstract than what I\'d been writing lately and must correspond to something very nice categorially; by the time I was done, I realised what it was: a special case of a [[monad]].  Then I saw that there were really no examples of monads on our page!, so I added a few, but the majority of examples of monads on the wiki now are Moore closures.  (And believe me, Moore closures are everywhere.)  Anyway, if you\'re trying to understand what monads are, why not try [[Moore closure]]s first?

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]

  * added an "Idea" section to [[Moore complex]], edited the section headers a bit -- and have a question onm terminology: isn't this really the "normalized chain complex" whereas the Moore complex is the one on all cells with differential the  alternating sum of face maps?

  * created [[organization of the nLab]] -- please see there for what this is about (or in fact, see the corresponding [nForum thread](http://www.math.ntnu.no/~stacey/Vanilla/nForum/comments.php?DiscussionID=36&page=1#Item_2) that is being linked to there)

  * added references to Goerss-Jardine's _Simplicial homotopy theory_ to [[Dold-Kan correspondence]] and [[Moore complex]]

  * reacted a bit at [[An Exercise in Kantization]] -- behind the scenes this is being developed further, I'd be happy to provide more detailed replies in a while, when things have stabilized a bit more

  * added a mention of and a link to [[Kan lift]] to the "Idea" section of [[Kan extension]]

  * replied to the discussion about pullback notation at [[Kan extension]]: I originally had "$p^*$" there. After somebody changed that to "$p_*$" I wrote the section "note on terminology". I'd be happy to have the $p^*$ reinstalled. 

# 2009-06-21 #

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Over at [[An Exercise in Kantization]], [[Eric Forgy]] and [[Daniel de França MTd2]] would like confirmation or correction from somebody that understands the paper (Alm\'s _[[Kantization09May27.pdf:file]]_) better than I do.
   *  Some additions to [[Vect]], [[Hilb]], and [[measurable space]].  (I plan to do more on the last, then move to [[measure space]].)

* [[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: 

   * I have a notational comment at [[Kan extension]]. Spurred by [[David Corfield]]'s [post](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/06/kan_lifts.html) at the Caf&eacute;, I hope to get started on [[Kan lift]] soon. (Done.) 

   * There's a running discussion between [[Toby Bartels]] and me at [[cyclic order]], centering on whether Connes' cycle category $\Lambda$ has been correctly characterized, or if not how to fix it. We agree now that a notion of "total cyclic order" is classically equivalent to the "linear cyclic order" notion used in the article, and equally feasible for purposes of trying to characterize $\Lambda$, but I'm currently perplexed by the apparent presence of a terminal object. 

# 2009-06-20 #

*  [[Tim Porter|Tim]]: Finally I have created [[2-crossed complex]], and in the process needed to create [[normal complex of groups]].  What would be nice is to work out exactly what $\infty$/$\omega$-groupoids correspond to 2-crossed complexes. Any ideas?  (It probably is obvious viewed from the right perspective but I fear I do not yet have the right perspective to say 'aha!') I can characterise these objects in homotopy theoretic language, but really would like some neat way of describing them in $\infty$-cat terms.

* [[Todd Trimble]]: asked a question of [[Mike Shulman|Mike]] and [[Toby Bartels|Toby]] over at [[cyclic order]]. 

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Wrote [[countable set]], [[infinite set]], [[relative complement]], and [[preimage]].
   *  Has the 'Change page name.' feature broken for anybody else?

# 2009-06-19 #

* [[Tim Porter|Tim]]: 
    
  *  I have added more material to [[2-crossed module]] including some exercises (at the foot of the 'page'! (Have fun!) I will not get around to doing an entry on 2-crossed complexes today.

  * I have adjusted [[homotopy coherent nerve]] in an attempt to answer some of the points made there by [[Todd Trimble|Todd]],

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]:

  * almost missed [[Tim Porter]]'s addition about the [[Dwyer-Kan loop groupoid]] to [[simplicial homotopy group]] -- that sounds very good, I'd be happy if we make this the default point of view at that entry and derive the more traditional description only as a special case from that

  * added the example of the bar construction of a group $G$ as the nerve of $\mathbf{B} G$ to [[nerve]]

  * added illustration to [[Kan fibration]]

  * added illustrative diagrams to [[boundary of a simplex]] and [[horn]]

  * added a section with details on ordinary nerves of ordinary categories to [[nerve]]

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Expanded [[measurable space]] quite a bit, but I need to go, so it hasn\'t really been proofread.
   *  Split [[measure space]] off from [[measurable space]].

# 2009-06-18 #

*  [[Todd Trimble]] keeps creating analysis pages that [[Toby Bartels|I]] link to; today\'s were [[measurable space]] and [[topological vector space]].

* [[Tim Porter|Tim]]:

   * I finally added some stuff into [[crossed complex]] giving more information on the link with [[simplicial group]] and [[Moore complex]].  I hope to get around to creating 2-crossed complex in a day or two!

   * The discussion on [[simplicial homotopy group]] possibly needs more opinions! I just added a bit more of my viewpoint to Urs's thoughts box, but I do find that I am not sure what the idea / context / viewpoint (or whatever) of this entry should 'optimally' be!



* [[Eric Forgy|Eric]]: In an attempt to understand Kan extension, I cooked up an example of a functor and added it to [[functor]]. Let me know if I made any mistake.

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Instead of changing links to [[path-connected space]] (which doesn\'t yet exist) to [[connected space]], I instead added `[[!redirects path-connected space]]` to [[connected space]].  That way, if we ever decide to separate out a new page [[path-connected space]], we don\'t need to go through all of the links and fix them!

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: added the defintion of the product to [[simplicial homotopy group]]

* [[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: wrote the beginnings of an apparently long-awaited article on [[weighted colimit]]s. 

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]

  * filled in the definition at [[simplicial homotopy]] together with an intentionally pedestrian proof that simplicial homotopy in a Kan complex is an equivalence relation

  * slightly polished the "remarks" section at [[simplicial set]]

* [[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: 

  * wrote [[measurable space]], including material on measures and basic integration theory. 

  * responded to queries of [[David Roberts]] at [[covering space]] and [[locally path-connected space]]. David wondered whether some material at [[covering space]] ought to be moved to [[universal covering space]]. I think we're covering similar material but with slightly different emphases; I'd like to see David put his imprimatur on the article on universal covering spaces, but leave [[covering space]] essentially intact while the material continues to settle into place; I'm thinking of adding more to it anyway (so that "to be continued" might still be appropriate). 

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: 

  * added a reference (and minor comments on references) to [[model structure on simplicial presheaves]]

  * added an opinion to [[simplicial homotopy group]]

    * will add the definition of the group structure later today  

* [[Andrew Stacey]]: Changed the example in [[topological concrete category]] for [[generalized smooth space]] since I think that all the examples listed there are topological over set.

*  [[David Roberts]]: 

   * Edited [[covering space]] as requested by [[Todd Trimble|Todd]]. I still wonder whether some of the discussion would be better off at [[universal covering space]].

   * Created stubs at [[semi-locally simply-connected space]] and [[locally path-connected space]].

# 2009-06-17 #

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  Fixed mistakes at [[topological concrete category]], thanks to having a good online reference.

* [[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: 

   * Wrote [[approximation of the identity]], linked to by one thing I wrote at [[Hilbert space]]. 

*  [[Tim Porter|Tim]]:

   * Did my idea of a partial fix for the dilemma at [[simplicial homotopy group]]. Please edit! The entry still needs the definition of the group structure on the homotopy groups.  I have included the link with the [[Moore complex]] of the [[Dwyer-Kan loop groupoid]]. I have also added a request for discussion here. 

* [[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: 

   * Added a bit to the examples section at [[Hilbert space]], mentioning in particular the orthonormal basis theorem. 

*  [[Tim Porter|Tim]]:

   * Added a useful reference to [[topological category]], plus a comment on terminology. It should be noted that the authors (Adamek, Herrlich and Strecker) use 'topological concrete category' in the index, which they shorten to 'topological category' in the text.  Does that provide a solution to the terminological problem?

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Wrote [[Hilbert space]].  I finished the definitions and then got tired, so there\'s not much else.  But we need this if we\'re ever going to discuss $2$-[[2-Hilbert space|Hilbert spaces]]!
   *  [[David Roberts]] and I would appreciate any terminological suggestions at the unfortunately-named [[topological category]].

# 2009-06-16 #

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Wrote [[topological category]], including a lot of vague stuff there, since I don\'t have good references here now.  But I\'m pretty sure that everything that I said is at least true.
   *  Wrote [[core]], using a term that I learned from [[Mike Shulman]] for an [[underlying groupoid]].
   *  Wrote [[semigroup]] and [[magma]], since they\'re such basic topics, but I didn\'t say much.
   *  Added stuff to [[reflective subcategory]] about how obects of the ambient category can be seen as objects of the subcategory equipped with [[extra structure]].  Besides the examples there, see also [[core]].
   *  In reply to the last point in what Urs has said immediately below, if you want to put in something that you *expect* to be controversial, and hesitate for that reason, then put it in and just *label* it as controversial.  Put in a [[HowTo|query box]] asking 'Is this right?' or saying 'This is my new definition.' or whatever.  Or put it in a new section at the bottom of the page, marked '## Uncertain material' or whatever.  The point is, get it down one way or another, and we will be very happy!

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: I have a comment and appeal at [[nInsights]]

  * in this context I also want to ask again everybody:

    * please don't forget to drop latest changes logs here alerting us of which changes you made where, if it's anything beyond fixing typos

    * if you feel something needs to have a place in the nLab, don't feel hesitant to add it. I am getting the impression there is in parts some hesitation to insert material without checking with everybody else first. I'd say more efficient would be: add the material you would like to see, and if it should really turn out that there is serious disagreement with some other contributor, we can still roll back things and look for compromises.

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]:
 
  * expanded [[inverse image]]: added an "Idea" section, restructured discussion into presheaf and sheaf and sheaf on top-space bits, added the crucial lemmas and theorems and provided detailed proofs of some of them.

  * replied again at [[simplicial homotopy group]]: [[Tim Porter|Tim]] or [[Toby Bartels|Toby]] should please feel free to implement the remaining terminology adjustment

  * reacted and replied at [[simplicial homotopy group]] (also have a question) and added a few further bits

*  [[Tim Porter|Tim]]:
   
   *  Discussion at [[simplicial homotopy group]].

# 2009-06-15 #

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Discussions at [[connected space]] and [[simplicial homotopy group]].
   *  New page at [[neighborhood]].

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]

  * created [[simplicial homotopy group]]

  * added to [[model structure on simplicial sets]] a puny beginning of a discussion of what is supposed to eventually become a discussion of the relation to model structures on strict $\infty$-groupoids 

  * created [[omega-nerve]] and [[model structure on strict omega-groupoids]]

  * expanded a bit on the discussion at the beginning of [[model structure on simplicial sets]]

  * added detailed proof to [[geometric morphism]] of the fact that geometric morphisms $Sh(X) \to Sh(Y)$ are bijectively induced from continuous functions $X \to Y$

*  [[Tim Porter|Tim]]: I have continued at [[homotopy coherent nerve]].  This ended up with several new links to not-yet-existing pages!



* [[Urs Schreiber]]:

  * created [[homeomorphism]] and [[local homeomorphism]] just to satisfy links

  * added theorem about stalkwise characterization of epi/mono/isos of sheaves to [[stalk]] and included an example

  * added a bit more to [[string structure]] (discussion of description in terms of class on total space, also some references, but very incomplete) - but still not done

  * split off remaining Friday session [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Friday, June 12]] for [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Strings, Fields, Topology]] following [[Toby Bartels|Toby]]

*  [[Todd Trimble]] created [[connected space]].

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Strings, Fields, Topology]] was getting too long for me to handle, so I removed the duplication of abstracts and broke the rest up by day.

# 2009-06-14 #

*  [[Tim Porter|Tim]]: I have had a go at [[homotopy coherent nerve]].  Still more to add though.

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]

  * added more details on the sheaf-case to [[point of a topos]] and created [[skyscraper sheaf]]

# 2009-06-13 #

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]

  * started creating [[string structure]] but had to quit before fully finished -- will continue tomorrow

  * created [[point of a topos]] and [[stalk]]

  * created [[Oberwolfach]]

  * pasted notes on Thomas Schick's talk on differential cohomology at [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Strings, Fields, Topology]] into [[differential cohomology]]

  * created 

    * [[local net]]

    * [[TQFT]]

    * [[FFRS-formalism]]

    * [[modular tensor category]] 

    but more like stubs to get some material in place, didn't find the leisure to really polish this

  * started adding links to keywords in the list of abstracts that [[Bruce Bartlett|Bruce]] added to [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Strings, Fields, Topology]] -- am hoping that eventually we'll fill these links with content, partly just by copy-and-pasting the relevant bits from the lecture notes (as a start)

* [[Tim Porter|Tim]]: 

  * Mike, ditto from me!


  * Made some changes to [[simplex category]] and [[join of simplicial sets]]. A more explicit mention of ordinal sum has been made and some minor corrections done.

* [[Bruce Bartlett|Bruce]]:
  
  * Congrats Mike!

  * Added lots of talk summaries and notes to [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Strings, Fields, Topology]]. Lots of editing help needed... what would be nice would be to have the links to the notes for the talks next to the talk titles --- both my notes as well as those of Gabriel Drummond-Cole (by linking to his [webpage](http://www.math.sunysb.edu/~blafard/notes/)).

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]: I gather it is in order to express congratulations to [[Mike Shulman]] given [the latest changes](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/diff/Mike+Shulman) to his page

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:  I think that the (unordered) notion of _category with inverses_ at [[partially ordered category]] should be the same as that of _[[dagger category]]_.

# 2009-06-12 #

*  [[Victor Porton]]:  Some other newer terms added (notably [[partially ordered category]]) to [[Categories and Sheaves]].

* [[Todd Trimble]]: I finally found some time to write up more of what I had planned for [[covering space]]s, and tried to link up with the comments made by David Roberts. David and Urs, please take a look. 

# 2009-06-11 #

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]:

  * created [[tetracategory]]

  * added Thursday talks to [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Strings, Fields, Topology
]]

  * replied to [[Tim Porter]] at [[join of simplicial sets]]
 
* [[Bruce Bartlett|Bruce]]: Added some comments abotu query boxes in personal nLab pages in the [[HowTo]] page.

*  [[Tim Porter|Tim]]: I have added a query to [[join of simplicial sets]]. Am I missing something, but I find the initial definition confusing as it does not mention the ordinal structure nor ordinal sum. (There may be a subtlety that I am missing so ...)

*  New pages: [[doctrine]], [[pretopological space]].

# 2009-06-10 #

*  New pages: [[Green-Schwarz mechanism]], [[quasigroup]].

* [[Urs Schreiber]] added Wednesday talk notes to [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Strings, Fields, Topology]]

* [[David Roberts]]: 

  * Put next, very drafty, chapter of my thesis on my personal web. Just click on my name and follow the white rabbit. 
  * Added another comment to [[covering space]]. This time about the (total) tangent groupoid as applied to the non-basepoint version of the universal covering space.


# 2009-06-09 #

*  More new pages:  [[Freudenthal suspension theorem]], [[replete subcategory]], [[strictly full subcategory]].

* [[Zoran Škoda]]: much expanded [[orbifold]], created [[Lie group]], [[compact Lie group]], [[orbispace]].

* [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]] 

  * created [[orbifold]] and [[orientifold]]

  * added further talk notes to [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Strings, Fields, Topology]]

  * added notes on first part of lecture by Thomas Schick on _differential cohomology_ to [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Strings, Fields, Topology]] -- am hoping to eventually move a polished version of that to [[differential cohomology]]

* [[David Roberts]]

  * Created [[universal covering space]], but it's still pretty much a stub.
  * Added some remarks to [[covering space]], but they will probably need to move to [[universal covering space]].

*  [[Toby Bartels]]
   *  Started [[discrete space]].
   *  There seems to be a link missing from the [[HowTo]] on CSS in personal webs.

# 2009-06-08 #

*  New pages:
   *  [[Mike Shulman]] wrote [[2-monad]].
   *  Besides asking people questions, [[Todd Trimble]] also started [[covering space]].

* [[Urs Schreiber]]: created [[Oberwolfach Workshop, June 2009 -- Strings, Fields, Topology]], linked to from [this](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/06/strings_fields_topology_in_obe.html) blog entry (am hoping to get around to add lots of further keyword links to existing $n$Lab entries, but maybe won't)

* [[Todd Trimble]]: asked Alex a question at [[Alex Hoffnung]]. 

* [[Bruce Bartlett|Bruce]]: Added link to notes to the strings, fields and topology workshop at Oberwolfach. Also added a "How To" section for creating CSS gismos like query boxes on your personal nLab wiki space.

# 2009-06-07 #

* [[John Baez|John]]: I created myself a [[John Baez:HomePage|new personal web]] since I lost the password for my old one --- and besides, the name of my old one was nonstandard.  So far the only thrilling feature of this new web is the introduction to a paper I'm writing with [[James Dolan]], tentatively titled 'Doctrines of Algebraic Geometry'.

* [[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: Tried to distill a bit of the [cafe discussion](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/06/mathematical_principles.html#c024277) about the [[empty space]].

# 2009-06-04 #

* [[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: Added some exposition to [[Hopf algebra]].

# 2009-06-03 #

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Thanks for [[prometric space]], Mike.  I didn\'t know about those, but they seem quite reasonable.  I was thinking that I might want to figure out the categorial meaning of the definition of [[gauge space]], but maybe it\'s just that it\'s a halfway attempt at prometric space!  (But do you have any good example of a nongaugeable prometric space?)
   *  I seem to have gotten into an edit conflict with you at [[Zorn's lemma]], Todd.  I didn\'t tell it to override your edit, but something happened regardless.  Anyway, I think that I\'ve fixed it.
   *  Also, our page is at [[Hausdorff maximal principle]], which seems to be more common, but maybe your name is better.  But look!, now it redirects!  And you can move it too!

* [[Todd Trimble]]: gave a proof of [[Zorn's lemma]]. Wouldn't mind expanding that entry to include the mutual equivalence between AC, Zorn, and well-ordering principle (assuming excluded middle). May get around to putting in something at [[Hausdorff maximality principle]]. 

* [[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: Inspired by [[gauge space]], created [[prometric space]].

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  [[Eric Forgy|Eric]] and I have been testing the new move and redirect features at the *top* (for some reason) of the [[Sandbox]].  It seems possible to move and to create new redirects (make sure that you see how, it\'s backwards from MediaWiki), but not (yet) possible to regularise all of the current redirect pages.
   *  Created a few requested pages.  The interesting ones are [[Bill Lawvere]], [[Boolean ring]], and [[ideal]].

# 2009-06-02 #

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  An [[AnonymousCoward|anonymous coward]] created a blank version of [[Hausdorff maximal principle]], so I started that ... but it needs proofs! (at least).
   *  A new reference, [[HAF]], since I\'ve now cited it thrice.
   *  Created [[gauge space]].  A lot of this is original research; years ago, I wanted to work out the general theory (even constructively) of quasigauge spaces, and perhaps now I will.  (Or perhaps I will stop here, with only results that are known or easy to prove from what is known.)

* [[Todd Trimble]]: Added some details on categorical operations on the category of [[Banach space]]s. 

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Added the standard examples to [[uniform space]].
   *  Corrected Andrew\'s reply to Mike at [[Froelicher space]].  (I\'m pretty sure that this is what you meant, Andrew!)
   *  Replied to [[David Roberts]] at [[Atiyah Lie groupoid]].

* [[Andrew Stacey]]: replied to [[Mike Shulman]] at [[Froelicher space]]

*  [[Toby Bartels]]:
   *  Archived [[2009 May changes]].
   *  Fixed some mistakes at [[uniform space]].

# 2009-06-01 #

* [[Andrew Stacey|Andrew]] proved a theorem about [[Froelicher space|Hausdorff Frölicher spaces]] and the relationship to limits and colimits of manifolds.

* [[Bruce Bartlett|Bruce]] added some stuff to Section 4 [[geometric infinity-function theory]] (with about query $QC(X)$ when $X$ is an $\omega$-groupoid internal to dg-manifolds) and ticked some things.

***

[[2008 changes|First list]] — [[2009 May changes|Previous list]] — No next list — **Current list**

***

category: meta