Here are the open problems stated at the [HoTT 2019 Summer School](https://hott.github.io/HoTT-2019//summer-school/) (on [[homotopy type theory]]), 
listed by the instructor who posed the problem:

#### Mathieu Anel: Logos Theory####

- Notion of higher theory? (syntactic approach? categorical approach à la Lawvere?)
	(e.g. CAT^lex, CAT_cc, LOGOS, …)

- Explicit distributivity formula between finite limits and colimit in a logos?
	colim_{something} lim_{something} —> lim_{something} colim_{something}
This should lead to a polynomial calculus for logoi (in the sense of polynomial functors)

- Explicit description of the symmetric logo functor? Sym: CAT_cc —> LOGOI

- Develop internal cat theory in a logos

- Define a class of logoi suited for the purpose of logic (and containing all presentable logoi)

####Egbert Rijke: Synthetic Homotopy Theory####

- deloop the 3-sphere: find a pointed connected type X s.th Omega(X) = S^3

- define the Grassmanians (& other interesting CW-complexes) using HITS.

- prove the BoTT periodicity theorem

####Jonas Frey: The Coherence Problem####

- define internal operads, semi-simplicial types, (oo,1)-categories in HoTT.

####Anders Mortberg: Cubical Type Theory####

- Efficient evaluation/ computation of cubical programs

- have a cubical TT where transport ref x == x.

####Guillaume Brunerie: Computation in Cubical Type Theory####

- find other interesting examples of cubical terms to compute (e.g. cohomology cup products)

####Kristina Sojakova:####

- conservativity of cubical TT over Book HoTT

- (suggested by Nicolai Kraus): Does adding a path between fixed points in a type preserve truncation level? Namely, if X is an n-type for n > 0 and a, b : X, is the HIT H generated by [-] : X —> H , p : [a] = [b] , still an n-type?

####Steve Awodey:####

- crossed modules classify 2-types

- define a notion of cubical quasi-category

- Cubical Homotopy Hypothesis: 
 sSet (w/Kan QMS) ~ cSet (Dedekind cubes w/Sattler QMS)

Return to [[open problems in homotopy type theory]].