
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A generalization of [[associative quasigroup]] to [[n-ary operation]]s. 

## Definition

Given a natural number $n$, an $n$-ary group is a set $S$ that both an [[n-ary semigroup]] and an [[n-ary quasigroup]]. 

\begin{remark}
A 2-ary group is *not* a [[group]]. 2-ary groups are [[associative quasigroups]], as they can be empty. 
\end{remark}

## Properties

\begin{definition}
An *n-ary identity element* is [TBD: Copy definition from Wikipedia/other sources] 
\end{definition}

\begin{theorem}
Every n-ary group with an n-ary identity element is a group, with the n-ary group operation being simply repeated application of a group's binary operation. 
\end{theorem}

## See also

* [[associative quasigroup]]

* [[n-ary semigroup]]

* [[n-ary quasigroup]]

* [[group]]

## References

* W. Dörnte, Untersuchungen über einen verallgemeinerten Gruppenbegriff, Mathematische Zeitschrift, vol. 29 (1928), pp. 1-19.

* E. L. Post, Polyadic groups, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 48 (1940), 208–350.

* W. A. Dudek, "On some old and new problems in n-ary groups", Quasigroups and Related Systems, 8 (2001), 15–36.

* Wiesław A. Dudek, Remarks to Głazek's results on n-ary groups, Discussiones Mathematicae. General Algebra and Applications 27 (2007), 199–233.

* Wiesław A. Dudek and Kazimierz Głazek, Around the Hosszú-Gluskin theorem for n-ary groups, Discrete Mathematics 308 (2008), 486–4876.

* Wikipedia, [n-ary group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-ary_group)