
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Philosophy
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include philosophy - contents]]
=--
#### Quantum systems
+--{: .hide}
[[!include quantum systems -- contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

While the inherently [[probability|probabilistic]] nature of [[quantum physics]] means, roughly, that as soon as there is more than one possibility, no [[quantum measurement]] outcome can be known with certainty; conversely this also means that all outcomes are possible with some probability. This converse statement had been stated by [Gell-Mann 1956](#GellMann56) for the case of [[quantum hadrodynamics]] (p. 859) in this form:

> "Principle of Compulsory Strong Interactions". Among baryons, antibaryons, and mesons, any process which is not forbidden by a conservation law actually does take place with appreciable probability. 

(See maybe also [Bunge 1976, 31](#Bunge76).)

For better or worse, [[Murray Gell-Mann]] on that same page found it helpful to add that:

> this is related to the state of affairs that is said to prevail in a perfect totalitarian state. Anything that is not compulsory is forbidden.

and some historians of science swallowed this red herring and ever since refer to Gell-Mann's "Principle of compulsion" in quantum physics instead as the "totalitarian principle" (eg. [Jaeger 2017](#Jaeger17), cf. [Kragh 2019a](#Kragh19a)). See also the "principle of plenitude" (cf. [Kragh 2019b](#Kragh19b)).


## References

The original article:

* {#GellMann56} [[Murray Gell-Mann]], *The interpretation of the new particles as displaced charge multiplets*,  Nuovo Cim **4** 2 (1956) 848–866 &lbrack;[doi:10.1007/BF02748000](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02748000)&rbrack;

Further discussion:

* {#Bunge76} Mario Bunge, p. 31 in: *Possibility and Probability*, pp. 17-34  in: *Foundations of Probability Theory, Statistical Interference, and Statistical Theories of Science*  Reidel (1976) &lbrack;[doi:10.1007/978-94-010-1438-0_2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-010-1438-0_2)&lbrack;

* {#Jaeger17} Gregg Jaeger, p. 5 of: *Quantum randomness and unpredictability*, Fortschr. Phys. **65** 6-8 (2017) &lbrack;[doi:10.1002/prop.201600053](https://doi.org/10.1002/prop.201600053)&rbrack;

* {#Kragh19a} Helge Kragh, *Physics and the Totalitarian Principle* &lbrack;[arXiv:1907.04623](https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.04623)&rbrack;

* {#Kragh19b} Helge Kragh, *Plenitude Philosophy and Chemical Elements*, International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry [**25** 1](http://hyle.org/journal/issues/25-1/) (2019) &lbrack;[pdf](http://hyle.org/journal/issues/25-1/kragh.pdf)&rbrack;

[[!redirects totalitarian principle]]

[[!redirects principle of plenitude]]
[[!redirects plenitude principle]]
