# Contents # 
* table of contents 
{:toc} 

## Definition 

Let $R$ be an [[integral domain]]. We say that an element $r\in R$ is a _unit_ if it is [[invertible element|invertible]]. A non-unit is called _irreducible_ if it can not be represented as a product of two non-units. 

A commutative integral domain $R$ is a __unique factorization domain__ (UFD for short) if every non-unit has a factorization $u = r_1 \cdots r_n$ as product of irreducible non-units and this decomposition is unique up to renumbering and rescaling the irreducibles by units. 

Put differently: let $K$ be the [[field of fractions]] of $R$, so that the [[group]] of units $K^\times$ is the complement of $0$. Then $R$ is a UFD iff the [[quotient group]] $K^\times/R^\times$ is a free abelian group, or more specifically: is freely generated as an abelian group by the set of cosets $f R^\times$ where $f$ ranges over irreducible elements. Another way of saying it is that the multiplicative monoid of nonzero [[principal ideals]] of $R$ is a commutative monoid freely generated by irreducible principal ideals. 

As a side remark, we observe that in this circumstance the exact sequence 

$$0 \to R^\times \to K^\times \to K^\times/R^\times \to 0$$ 

splits and there is an isomorphism $K^\times \cong R^\times \oplus (K^\times/R^\times)$ of abelian groups. 

## Examples 

* The ring of (rational) [[integers]] $\mathbb{Z}$ is a UFD. 

* A [[principal ideal domain]] (PID) is a UFD. (In particular, a [[Euclidean domain]] is a UFD.) As a partial converse, a [[Dedekind domain]] that is a UFD is a PID.  

* If $R$ is a UFD, then its [[polynomial]] ring $R[x]$ is also a UFD. 

* If $R$ is a UFD, then so is any [[localization]] $S^{-1} R$. 

* A [[regular local ring]] (for example, a [[discrete valuation]] ring) is a UFD. 

* If $R$ is a UFD and all of its localizations at primes are regular local rings, then the ring of [[formal power series]] $R[ [x] ]$ is a UFD. 

* For $D$ a positive integer, the [[algebraic integer|ring of integers]] in $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{-D})$ is a UFD iff $D$ is a *Heegner number*, namely one of the numbers $1, 2, 3, 7, 11, 19, 43, 67, 163$. 

* If $R$ is not [[integral closure|integrally closed]], then it is not a UFD. 

## Properties 

* As noted above, a UFD is necessarily integrally closed. 

* The lattice of principal ideals under the inclusion order is a distributive lattice. 