
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Group Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include group theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

Given a [[field]] $k$, the **general linear group** $GL(n,k)$ (or $GL_n(k)$) is the [[group]] of [[invertible morphism|invertible]] [[linear maps]] from the [[vector space]] $k^n$.  It may canonically be identified with the group of $n\times n$ [[matrix|matrices]] with entries in $k$ having nonzero [[determinant]].

### As a topological group
 {#AsAtopologicalGroup}

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


Let $k = \mathbb{R}$ or $= \mathbb{C}$ be the [[real numbers]] or the [[complex numbers]] equipped with their [[Euclidean topology]].

In the following we focus on the case $k = \mathbb{R}$. The case $k = \mathbb{C}$ is completely analogous.

+-- {: .num_defn #GLnAsTopologicalGroup}
###### Definition
**(general linear group as a topological group)**

For $n \in \mathbb{N}$, as a [[topological group]] the _general linear group_ $GL(n, \mathbb{R})$ is defined as follows.

The underlying group is the [[group]] of [[real number|real]] $n \times n$ [[matrices]] whose [[determinant]] is non-vanishing

$$
  GL(n)
  \;\coloneqq\;
  \left(
    A \in Mat_{n \times n}(\mathbb{R})
    \; \vert \;
    det(A) \neq 0
  \right)
$$

with group operation given by [[matrix multiplication]]. 

The [[topological space|topology]] on this set is the [[subspace topology]] as a subset of the [[Euclidean space]] of [[matrices]]
   
$$
  Mat_{n \times n}(\mathbb{R}) \simeq \mathbb{R}^{(n^2)}
$$

with its [[metric topology]]. 

=--

+-- {: .num_lemma #GLnTopologicalWellDefined}
###### Lemma
**(group operations are continuous)**

Definition \ref{GLnAsTopologicalGroup} is indeed well defined in that the group operations on $GL(n,\mathbb{R})$ are indeed [[continuous functions]] with respect to the given topology.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Observe that under the identification $Mat_{n \times n}(\mathbb{R}) \simeq \mathbb{R}^{(n^2)}$ [[matrix multiplication]] is a [[polynomial function]] 

$$
  \mathbb{R}^{(n^2)}
   \times
  \mathbb{R}^{(n^2)}
   \simeq
  \mathbb{R}^{ 2 n^2 }
    \longrightarrow
  \mathbb{R}^{(n^2)}
    \simeq
  Mat_{n \times n}(\mathbb{R})
  \,.
$$

Similarly [[inverse matrix|matrix inversion]] is a [[rational function]]. Now [[rational functions are continuous]] on their [[domain]] of definition, 
and since a real matrix is invertible previsely if its determinant is non-vanishing, the domain of definition for matrix inversion is precisely 
$GL(n,\mathbb{R}) \subset Mat_{n \times n}(\mathbb{R})$.

=--
   
+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The [[topological group|topological]] general linear group $GL(n,\mathbb{R})$ (def. \ref{GLnAsTopologicalGroup}) is


1. not [[compact topological space|compact]];

1. [[locally compact topological space|locally compact]];

1. [[paracompact Hausdorff topological space|paracompact Hausdorff]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Observe that 

$$
  GL_n(n,\mathbb{R}) \subset Mat_{n \times n}(\mathbb{R}) \simeq \mathbb{R}^{(n^2)}
$$
   
is an [[open subset|open]] [[subspace]], since it is the [[pre-image]] under the [[determinant]] function (which is a [[polynomial]] and hence continuous, as in the proof of lemma \ref{GLnTopologicalWellDefined}) of the of the open subspace $\mathbb{R} \setminus \{0\} \subset \mathbb{R}$.

As an open subspace of Euclidean space, $GL(n,\mathbb{R})$ is not compact, by the [[Heine-Borel theorem]].

As Euclidean space is Hausdorff, and since every [[subspace]] of a Hausdorff space is again Hausdorff, so $Gl(n,\mathbb{R})$ is Hausdorff.
   
Similarly, as Euclidean space is [[locally compact topological space|locally compact]] and since an open subspace of a locally compact space is again locally compact, it follows that $GL(n,\mathbb{R})$ is locally compact.

From this it follows that $GL(n,\mathbb{R})$ is paracompact, since locally compact topological groups are paracompact ([this prop.](topological+group#ConnectedLocallyCompactTopologicalGroupsAreSigmaCompact)).



=--




### As an algebraic group

This group can be considered as a (quasi-affine) sub[[variety]] of the [[affine scheme|affine space]] $M_{n\times n}(k)$ of square matrices of size $n$ defined by the condition that the [[determinant]] of a matrix is nonzero. It can be also presented as an affine subvariety of the affine space $M_{n \times n}(k) \times k$ defined by the equation $\det(M)t = 1$ (where $M$ varies over the factor $M_{n \times n}(k)$ and $t$ over the factor $k$). 

This [[variety]] is an algebraic $k$-group, and if $k$ is the field of real or complex numbers it is a [[Lie group]] over $k$.

One may in fact consider the set of invertible matrices over an arbitrary unital [[ring]], not necessarily commutative. Thus $GL_n: R\mapsto GL_n(R)$ becomes a [[presheaf]] of [[group]]s on $Aff=Ring^{op}$ where one can take rings either in commutative or in noncommutative sense. In the commutative case, this functor defines a [[group scheme]]; it is in fact the affine group scheme represented by the commutative ring $R = \mathbb{Z}[x_{11}, \ldots, x_{n n}, t]/(det(X)t - 1)$. 

Coordinate rings of general linear groups and of special general linear groups have [[quantum group|quantum deformations]] called [[quantum linear groups]]. 


## Stable and unstable versions:

The above is sometimes referred to as the unstable general linear group, whilst the result if one lets $n$ go to infinity is called the [[stable general linear group]] of $R$, and is then written $GL(R)$ with no suffix.

## Related concepts

* [[translation group]], [[affine group]]

* [[Gauss decomposition]], 

* [[special linear group]], [[projective linear group]]

* [[orthogonal group]], [[unitary group]], 

* [[Borel subgroup]], [[flag variety]]

* [[group of units]]

* [[jet group]]

* [[general linear supergroup]], [[quantum linear group]]

## References 

* O.T. O'Meara, _Lectures on Linear Groups_, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1974.

* B. Parshall, J.Wang, _Quantum linear groups_, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 89(1991), No. 439, vi+157 pp. 


[[!redirects general linear group]]
[[!redirects general linear groups]]
