#Idea#

The concept _algebroid_ is the [[horizontal categorification|many object version]] (or oidification)  of the concept _unital associative algebra_.

#Definition#

An **algebroid** is a [[category]] [[enriched category|enriched over]] ([[Vect]],$\otimes$).


##Remarks##

* An [[algebra]] is an algebroid with a single object. Hence a one-object $Vect$-enriched category. See [[horizontal categorification]].

* Compare with similar concepts such as [[groupoid]] and [[ringoid]].

* Beware that a [[Lie algebroid]] is not a special case of an algebroid in the above sense. The point is that there is a restrictive and a general sense of "algebra". In the restrictive sense an algebra is an associative unital algebra, hence a [[monoid]] in $Vect$, hence a one-object $Vect$-enriched category. But in a more general sense an algebra is an algebra over an [[operad]]. It is this more general sense in terms of which Lie algebras are special cases of algebras and [[Lie algebroid]]s their [[horizontal categorification]].


#Generalizations#

* Replacing plain vector spaces with chain complexes of vector spaces leads to an $\infty$-version of algebroids:
a category enriched in chain complexes, which following the above reasoning could justly be called a _DG algebroid_  is usually called a _DG-category_. 

* Replacing plain vector spaces with [[Banach space]]s leads to a $C^*$-version of algebroids: a category enriched in Banach spaces with some extra structure, which following the above reasoning could justly be call a _$C^*$-algebroid_ is usually called a $C^*$-category. See [[spaceoid]]s.