+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### $\infty$-Lie theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-Lie theory - contents]]
=--
#### Super-Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include supergeometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A [[super Lie algebra]] extension of a [[Poincare Lie algebra]]. 

The corresponding [[super Lie group]] is the [[super Euclidean group]] (except for the signature of the metric).

## Definition

By the general discussion at [[Chevalley-Eilenberg algebra]], we may characterize the [[super Poincaré Lie algebra]] $\mathfrak{siso}(D-1,1)$ by its CE-algebra $CE(\mathfrak{siso}(D-1,1))$ "of [[left-invariant 1-forms]]" on its group manifold.

+-- {: .num_defn #CEAlgebraOfSuperPoincare}
###### Definition

The [[Chevalley-Eilenberg algebra]] $CE(\mathfrak{siso}(d-1,1))$ is generated on 

* elements $\{e^a\}$ and $\{\omega^{ a b}\}$ of degree $(1,even)$

* and elements $\{\psi^\alpha\}$ of degree $(1,odd)$

with the differential defined by

$$
  d_{CE} \omega^{a b} = \omega^a{}_b \wedge \omega^{b c}
$$

$$
  d_{CE} e^{a } = \omega^a{}_b \wedge e^b + \frac{i}{2}\bar \psi \Gamma^a \psi
$$

$$
  d_{CE} \psi = \frac{1}{4} \omega^{ a b} \Gamma_{a b} \psi
  \,.
$$

Removing the terms involving $\omega$ here this is the [[super translation algebra]].

=--

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

The abstract generators in def. \ref{CEAlgebraOfSuperPoincare} are identified with [[left invariant 1-forms]] on the [[super-translation group]] as follows.

Let $(x^a, \theta^\alpha)$ be the canonical [[coordinates]] on the [[supermanifold]] $\mathbb{R}^{d|N}$ underlying the super translation group. Then the identification is 

* $\psi^\alpha = d \theta^\alpha$.

* $e^a = d x^a + \frac{i}{2} \overline{\theta} \Gamma^a d \theta$.

This then gives the formula for the differential of the super-[[vielbein]] in def. \ref{CEAlgebraOfSuperPoincare} as

$$ 
  \begin{aligned}
    d e^a & = d (d x^a + \frac{i}{2} \overline{\theta} \Gamma^a d \theta)
    \\
    & = \frac{i}{2} d \overline{\theta}\Gamma^a d \theta
    \\
    & = \frac{i}{2} \overline{\psi}\Gamma^a \psi
  \end{aligned}
  \,.
$$


=--



## Properties

### Lie algebra cohomology
 {#LieAlgebraCohomology}

The super Poincar&eacute; Lie algebra has, on top of the [[Lie algebra cohomology|Lie algebra cocycles]] that it inherits from $\mathfrak{so}(n)$, a discrete number of special cocycles bilinear in the spinors, on the [[super translation algebra]], that exist only in very special dimensions.

For the statement of the following theorem, we use the relation between [[division algebra and supersymmetry]], as described there.

**Theorem**

* In dimensional $d =  3,4,6, 10$, $\mathfrak{siso}(d-1,1)$ has a nontrivial 3-cocycle given by

  $$
    (\psi, \phi, A) \mapsto g(\psi \cdot \phi, A)
  $$

  for spinors $\psi, \phi \in \mathcal{S}$ and vectors $A \in \mathcal{T}$, and 0 otherwise.

* In dimensional $d =  4,5,7, 11$, $\mathfrak{siso}(d-1,1)$ has a nontrivial 4-cocycle given by

  $$
    (\Psi, \Phi, \mathcal{A}, \mathcal{B}) \mapsto 
    \langle \Psi , (\mathcal{A}\mathcal{B}- \mathcal{B} \mathcal{A})\Phi \rangle
  $$

  for spinors $\Psi, \Phi \in \mathcal{S}$ and vectors $\mathcal{A}, \mathcal{B} \in \mathcal{V}$, with the commutator taken in the Clifford algebra.

The 4-cocycle in $d = 11$ is the one that induces the [[supergravity Lie 3-algebra]].

### Extensions 

#### Super $L_\infty$-algebra extensions

The [[super L-infinity algebra]] [[infinity-Lie algebra cohomology]] of the super Poincar&eacute; Lie algebra corresponding to the [above](#LieAlgebraCohomology) cocycles involves

[[supergravity Lie 6-algebra]] $\to$ [[supergravity Lie 3-algebra]] $\to$ **super-Poincar&eacute; Lie algebra**


#### Polyvector extensions
 {#PolyvectorExtensions}

The super-Poincar&eacute; Lie algebra has a class of super Lie algebra extensions called _polyvector extensions_ , because they involve additional generators that transforn as skew-symmetric [[tensor]]s. A complete classification is in ([ACDP](#ACDP)).

##### As automorphism Lie algebras of Lie $n$-superalgebras

At least some of the [polyvector extensions](#PolyvectorExtensions) of the super Poincar&eacute; Lie algebra arise as the [[automorphism]] super Lie algebras of the [[Lie n-algebra]] 
[[infinity-Lie algebra cohomology|extensions]] classified by the cocycles discussed above.

For instance the automorphisms of the [[supergravity Lie 3-algebra]] gives the "M-theory Lie algebra"-extension of super-Poincar&eacute; in 11-dimensions. This is discussed [here](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/supergravity+Lie+3-algebra#Polyvector).




## Related concepts


* [[super Poincaré group]]

* [[super translation algebra]]

* [[supersymmetry]], [[Green-Schwarz action functional]]


## References

### Polyvector extensions
 {#PolyvectorExtensionRefs}

Some standard exposition is for instance in

* _Super spacetimes and super Poincar&eacute;-group_ ([pdf](http://www.math.ucla.edu/~vsv/papers/ch6.pdf))


A comprehensive account and classification of the polyvector extensions of the super Poincar&eacute; Lie algebras is in

* D. V. Alekseevsky, V. Cortés, C. Devchand, A. Van Proeyen, _Polyvector Super-Poincar&eacute; Algebras_ Commun.Math.Phys. 253 (2004) 385-422 ([arXiv:hep-th/0311107](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0311107))
 {#ACDP}

See also

* C. Chrysso‌malakos, [[José de Azcárraga]], J. M. Izquierdo and C. Pérez Bueno, _The geometry of branes and extended superspaces_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9904137](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9904137))

### Super Lie algebra cohomology
 {#ReferencesLieAlgebraCohomology}

The supr-[[Lie algebra cohomology]] of the [[super Poincare Lie algebra]] is completely classified in

* [[Friedemann Brandt]], _Supersymmetry algebra cohomology_ 

  _I: Definition and general structure_  J. Math. Phys.51:122302, 2010, ([arXiv:0911.2118](http://arxiv.org/abs/0911.2118))

  _II: Primitive elements in 2 and 3 dimensions_, J. Math. Phys. 51 (2010) 112303 ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/1004.2978))

  _III: Primitive elements in four and five dimensions_ ([arXiv:1005.2102](http://arxiv.org/abs/1005.2102))

  _IV: Primitive elements in all dimensions from $D=4$ to $D=11$_, J. Math. Phys. 54, 052302 (2013) ([arXiv:1303.6211](arxiv.org/abs/1303.6211))

and for some special cases of this, with the help of a computer algebra system, also in:

* Michael Movshev, [[Albert Schwarz]], Renjun Xu, _Homology of Lie algebra of supersymmetries_ ([arXiv:1011.4731](http://arxiv.org/abs/1011.4731)) 

* Michael Movshev, [[Albert Schwarz]], Renjun Xu, _Homology of Lie algebra of supersymmetries and of super Poincare Lie algebra_ ([arXiv:1106.0335](http://arxiv.org/abs/1106.0335))

For applications of this see also at _[[Green-Schwarz action functional]]_.

The exceptional fermionic cocycles on the super Poincar&eacute; Lie algebra, and their construction using normed division algebras, are discussed here:

* [[John Baez]], [[John Huerta]], _Division algebras and supersymmetry I_ ([arXiv:0909.0551](http://arxiv.org/abs/0909.0551))

* [[John Baez]], [[John Huerta]], _Division algebras and supersymmetry II_ ([arXiv:1003.34360](http://arxiv.org/abs/1003.3436))

* [[John Huerta]], _Division Algebras, Supersymmetry and Higher Gauge Theory_, ([arXiv:1106.3385](http://arxiv.org/abs/1106.3385))

This subsumes some of the results in

* [[José de Azcárraga]] and [[Paul Townsend]], _Superspace geometry and classification of supersymmetric extended objects_, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2579--2582 (1989)

A direct constructions of ordinary (Lie algebraic) extensions of the super Poincare Lie algebra by means of [[division algebras]] is in

* Jerzy Lukierski, Francesco Toppan, _Generalized Space-time Supersymmetries, Division Algebras and Octonionic M-theory_ ([pdf](http://cbpfindex.cbpf.br/publication_pdfs/NF00102.2010_08_03_10_47_48.pdf))

For more on this see at _[[division algebra and supersymmetry]]_.


[[!redirects super Poincaré Lie algebra]]