
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Super-Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include supergeometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Supergeometry is the ([[higher geometry|higher]]) [[geometry]] over the [[base topos]] on [[superpoint]]s modeled on the canonical [[line object]] $\mathbb{R}$ in there.

As ordinary [[differential geometry]] studies spaces -- [[smooth manifold]]s -- that locally look like [[vector space]]s, supergeometry studies spaces -- [[supermanifold]]s -- that locally look like [[super vector space]]s.

As ordinary [[algebraic geometry]] studies spaces -- [[scheme]]s -- that locally look like [[affine space]]s, supergeometry studies [[superscheme]]s.

From the point of view of [[noncommutative geometry]], the supergeometry is a very mild special case of noncommutativity in geometry: some coordinates commute, some anticommute.

## Related concepts

* [[superpoint]]

* [[super ∞-groupoid]], [[smooth super ∞-groupoid]]

* [[supermanifold]]

* [[supersymmetry]]

## References

The formulation of supergeometry as geometry over the [[topos]] over the category of [[superpoints]] is reviewed in

* [[Christoph Sachse]], _A Categorical Formulation of Superalgebra and Supergeometry_ ([arXiv:0802.4067](http://arxiv.org/abs/0802.4067))
 {#Sachse} 

For many more references see at _[[supermanifold]]_.

Plenty of discussion of supergeometry with an eye towards [[supersymmetry]] in [[quantum field theory]] is in

* [[Pierre Deligne|P. Deligne]], [[Pavel Etingof|P. Etingof]], [[Dan Freed|D.S. Freed]], L. Jeffrey, [[David Kazhdan|D. Kazhdan]], J. Morgan, D.R. Morrison, [[Edward Witten|E. Witten]] (eds.)  _[[Quantum Fields and Strings]], A course for mathematicians_, 2 vols. Amer. Math. Soc. Providence 1999. ([web version](http://www.math.ias.edu/qft))

especially in the contribution

* [[Pierre Deligne]], [[Daniel Freed]], _Supersolutions_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9901094](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9901094)).

The appendix there 

* _Sign manifesto_ ([pdf](http://publications.ias.edu/sites/default/files/79_SignManifesto.pdf))

means to sort out various sign conventions of relevance.

