# Axioms of replacement and collection
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

The axioms of replacement and collection are some of the 'strong' axioms of [[set theory]].  They is not necessary for formalising 'ordinary' mathematics and do not hold in such basic systems as [[ETCS]].  They are necessary, however, whenever [[recursion|recursively]] constructing a set that is 'larger' than any set known before.

There are many variations on these axioms (which are actually axiom *schemata* in most systems), but any given system should only need one.


## Statements

In general, these axioms apply to a [[binary relation]] that relates elements of one [[set]] $A$ to arbitrary sets.  However, we do *not* expect that the relation itself be an object in the theory; really, we have an axiom schema with one axiom for every binary [[predicate]] of the proper form.  We will write this predicate as $\phi(x,Y)$, where $x$ stands for an elment of $A$ and $Y$ stands for any set.  (Note that there may well be other free variables in the predicate.)

Generally, $\phi$ will need to be an [[entire relation]] for the axiom to apply; that is, the axiom has as a hypothesis that, for every $x \in A$, there is some $Y$ such that $\phi(x,Y)$ holds.  In versions called 'replacement' instead of 'collection', $\phi$ also needs to be [[functional relation|functional]]; that is, the axiom has the hypothesis that, for every $x \in A$, there is a *unique* $Y$ such that $\phi(x,Y)$ holds.  Thus, most of the 'replacement' versions only make sense if the language has a notion of [[equality]] of sets.

So much for the hypothesis of the axiom; the conclusion asserts the existence of a [[family of sets]] to which appropriate $Y$s belong.  In a material set theory, we can simply state the existence of set $\mathcal{F}$ such that certain $Y \in \mathcal{F}$.  In a structural set theory, we state the existence of an index set $I$, a total set $E$, and a function $f\colon E \to I$ such that each [[fibre]] $f^*(x)$ for $x \in I$ is equal to (or at least isomorphic to) certain $Y$.  (Often we can take $I$ to be $A$, but that does not come into the statement of the axioms.)

...

## References

Section III.8 in 

* George Tourlakis, _Lectures in Logic and Set Theory, Volume 2: Set Theory_, Cambridge University Press (2003)


* [[André Joyal]], [[Ieke Moerdijk]], _A categorical theory of cumulative hierarchies of sets_, C. R. Math. Rep. Acad. Sci. Canada 13 (1991) 55-58.

[[!redirects axiom of replacement]]
[[!redirects axioms of replacement]]
[[!redirects axiom scheme of replacement]]
[[!redirects axiom schemes of replacement]]
[[!redirects axiom schema of replacement]]
[[!redirects axiom schemas of replacement]]
[[!redirects axiom schemata of replacement]]

[[!redirects axiom of collection]]
[[!redirects axioms of collection]]
[[!redirects axiom scheme of collection]]
[[!redirects axiom schemes of collection]]
[[!redirects axiom schema of collection]]
[[!redirects axiom schemas of collection]]
[[!redirects axiom schemata of collection]]

category: foundational axiom
