
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Geometry
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Definition

A __group scheme__ is a [[group object]] in the category of [[schemes]] (or in a category of some schemes as for instance that of schemes over a fixed base scheme); in particular a group scheme is a [[group functor]]. As explained at [[group object]] there are two equivalent ways of realizing this.

One way is to define it as a functor $G:C Ring\to Set$ equipped with a transformation $m:G\times G\to G$ satisfying the properties spelled out at [[group object]].

The other way is to define it as a functor $Sch\to Grp$ from the category of schemes to that of (discrete) groups whose composition with the forgetful functor $Grp\to Set$ is representable.


Grothendieck emphasized the study of schemes over a fixed base scheme. Following this idea in the [[functor of points]] formalism, a group scheme over a scheme $X$ is a functor

$$
G: (Sch /X)^{op} \to Grp
$$

A **morphism of group schemes** $f:G\to H$ is a morphism of schemes that is a group homomorphism on any choice of values of points. This is more easily stated by saying that a morphism of group schemes must be a [[natural transformation]] between the [[functor of points]]; i.e. $f$ is required to be a natural transformation of functors with values in the category $Grp$ of groups (instead of with values in Set); an equivalent way to state this is that $f$ needs to satisfy $f m=m(f\times f)$ if $m:G\times G\to G$ denotes the group law on $G$.

## Generalizations

This construction generalizes to [[ind-object|ind-schemes]] (as for example [[formal scheme|formal schemes]]) to that of a [[formal group scheme]].

## Examples

* For a field $k$ the terminal $k$-scheme $Sp_k k$ is a group scheme in a unique way.

* An [[affine scheme|affine]] group scheme. Affine group [[variety|varieties]] are called [[linear algebraic group|linear algebraic groups]].

* Complete group varieties are called [[abelian variety|abelian varieties]].

* Given any group $G$, one can form the [[constant group scheme]] $G_X$ over $X$. 

* [[etale group scheme]] is the spectrum of a commutative [[Hopf algebra]]. In this case the multiplication- resp. inversion- reps. unit map are given by [[comultiplication]] reps. [[antipodism]] resp. [[counit]] in the hope algebra.


* The functor $\mu:=\mathbb{G}_m$ is a group scheme given by $\mathbb{G}_m(S)=\Gamma(S, \mathcal{O}_S)^\times$. A scheme is sent to the invertible elements of its global functions. This group scheme is called *the multiplicative group scheme*. In context of [[p-divisible group|p-divisible groups]] the kernels of the $k$-group scheme endomorphisms of $\mathbb{G}_m$ defined by $(-)^n:x\mapsto x^n$ for an integer $n$ are of particular interest. These kernels give the group schemes of the $n$-th [[root of unity]].

* [[diagonalizable group scheme]]. Note that the multiplicative group scheme is diagonalizable.

* [[multiplicative group scheme]] also called *group scheme of multiplicative type*. Every diagonalizable group scheme is in particular of multiplicative type.

* The *additive group scheme* assigns to a ring its additive group. Also here the kernels of the powering-by-n map are of interest. These kernels give the group schemes of the $n$-th [[nilpotent object|nilpotent element]].

* Group schemes can be constructed by [[restriction of scalars]].

* The functor $\alpha:=\mathbb{G}_a$ is a group scheme given by $\mathbb{G}_a(S)=\Gamma(S, \mathcal{O}_S)$ the additive group of the ring of global functions. This group scheme is called *the additive group scheme*.

* the kernel of any group scheme morphism is a group scheme.

* Every [[algebraic group]] is in particular a group scheme.


## Cartier dual

See also [[Cartier duality]].

Suppose now that $G$ is a finite flat commutative group scheme (over $X$). The __Cartier dual__ of $G$ is given by the functor $G^D(S)=Hom (G\otimes S, \mathbb{G}_m \otimes S)$. The Hom is taken in the category of group schemes over $S$.

For example, $\alpha_p^D\simeq \alpha_p$.  


## References

* M. Artin, J. E. Bertin, M. Demazure, P. Gabriel, A. Grothendieck, M. Raynaud, J.-P. Serre, _Schemas en groupes_, i.e. SGA III-1, III-2, III-3

* Michel Demazure, [[Pierre Gabriel|P. Gabriel]], _Groupes algebriques_, tome 1 (later volumes never appeared), Mason and Cie, Paris 1970

* Michel [[Demazure, lectures on p-divisible groups]] [web](http://sites.google.com/site/mtnpdivisblegroupsworkshop/lecture-notes-on-p-divisible-groups)

* W. Waterhouse, _Introduction to affine group schemes_, GTM 66, Springer 1979. 

* D. Mumford, _Abelian varieties_, 1970, 1985.

* J. C. Jantzen, _Representations of algebraic groups_, Acad. Press 1987 (Pure and Appl. Math. vol 131); 2nd edition AMS Math. Surveys and Monog. 107 (2003; reprinted 2007)


[[!redirects group scheme]]
[[!redirects group schemes]]

[[!redirects Cartier dual]]
[[!redirects Cartier duals]]
