
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Functional analysis
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functional analysis - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents
* table of contents
{:toc}

For an unrelated notion in differential geometry see [[distribution of subspaces]]. 

## Idea

In [[functional analysis]], a _distribution_ (or generalized function) is a [[linear functional|linear]] [[functional]] on a [[topological vector space]] of sufficiently well-behaved functions which may be given by [[integration]] against a fixed such function, but may be more general than that. In fact on a manifold, one may more properly distinguish the generalized functions from distributions, in the sense that generalized functions be functionals on densities, and distributions functionals on functions. They extend traditional spaces of Lebesgue integrable functions in such a way to have possibility to define generalized derivatives without exceptions and to treat fundamental solutions of linear partial differential equations as "functions". 

Generalized functions were introduced by S. L. Sobolev in 1935, and independently (under the name _distributions_) by [[Laurent Schwartz]] in the 1940's, who unaware of Sobolev's work developed an extensive theory for them. For an infinite-dimensional variant used in the foundation of Feynman [[path integral]] see also [[Connes distribution]].

## Definition
 {#Definitions}

We first recall the 

* [Traditional definition](#TraditionalDefinition).

Then we consider the axiomatic reformulation in terms of [[monads]] following [Kock 11](#Kock11).

* [Characterization by monads](#CharacterizationByMonads)


### Traditional definition
 {#TraditionalDefinition}

Distributions come in various flavors, depending on what spaces of functions they act on. The functions they act on are called **test functions**; typically they are smooth functions on domains in Euclidean space satisfying some boundedness property. 

The widest (and generally the default) notion is as follows. 


+-- {: .num_defn #CompactlySupportedTestFunctions}
###### Definition
**(compactly supported test functions)**

For $X \subset \mathbb{R}^n$ a [[smooth manifold]] given as an [[open subset]] of a [[Euclidean space]], the [[topological vector space]] $C^\infty_c(X)$ of _compactly supported test functions_ is the following

1. the underlying set is the set of [[bump functions]], hence of [[smooth functions]] $X \to \mathbb{R}$ to the [[real numbers]] with [[compact support]];

1. equipped with evident [[real vector space]] structure given by pointwise addition and pointwise multipication of functions.

1. equipped with the [[topological space|topology]] which is the [[metric topology]] induced from the family of [[seminorms]]

   $$\rho_{K, \alpha}(f) = \sup_{x \in K} |\partial^{\alpha} f|$$ 

   where $K \subseteq U$ is [[compact topological space|compact]] and $\alpha = (\alpha_1, \ldots, \alpha_n)$ is a multi-index and 

   $$\partial^{\alpha} = \frac{\partial^{\alpha_1}}{\partial x^{\alpha_1}} \ldots \frac{\partial^{\alpha_n}}{\partial x^{\alpha_n}}$$ 

   is the corresponding [[differential operator]]. 

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The [[topological vector space]] $C^\infty_c(X)$ of compactly supported test functions (def. \ref{CompactlySupportedTestFunctions}) is [[locally convex topological vector space|locally convex]] and [[complete space|complete]] with respect to its [[uniformity]]; it is in fact an LF-space: an [[inductive limit]] of [[Fréchet spaces]] $C_c^{\infty}(K)$ (each of which has [[empty set|empty]] [[interior]] as a [[subspace]] of $C_c^{\infty}(U)$, so by the [[Baire category theorem]], $C_c^{\infty}(U)$ is not itself a [[Fréchet space]]). 

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #DistributionOnOpenSubsetOfEuclideanSpace}
###### Definition
**(distribution on Euclidean space)**

Let $X \subset \mathbb{R}^n$ be a [[smooth manifold]] given as an [[open subset]] of [[Euclidean space]].

A **distribution on** $X$ is a [[continuous linear functional]] of the form

$$C^\infty_c(X) \longrightarrow \mathbb{R}$$ 

from the [[topological vector space]] of compactly supported test functions (def. \ref{CompactlySupportedTestFunctions}) to the [[real numbers]].

The space of distributions on $X$ is denoted $\mathcal{D}'(X)$ (see also remark \ref{NotationForSpaceOfDistributions}). There is an obvious bilinear pairing 

$$
  \array{
    \mathcal{D}(X) \times C_c^{\infty}(X) &\longrightarrow& \mathbb{R}
    \\
    (S, \phi) &\mapsto& S(\phi)
  }
$$ 

given by [[evaluation]]. 

Often one writes $\langle S, \phi\rangle$ instead of $S(\phi)$. The space of distributions can be given the weak $*$-topology, meaning the smallest topology rendering the maps 

$$\langle -, \phi\rangle \;\colon\; \mathcal{D}'(U) \to \mathbb{R}$$ 

continuous for all test functions $\phi$.  As $C_c^\infty(U)$ is reflexive, this agrees with the weak topology.  

=--

Other natural topologies exist, such as uniform convergence on compact subsets of $C_c^\infty(U)$ (in this case, this agrees with uniform convergence on bounded subsets which usually goes by the name of the *strong* topology).


+-- {: .num_remark #NotationForSpaceOfDistributions}
###### Remark
**(notation)**

On general grounds the symbols $D(X)$ or $\mathcal{D}(X)$ or similar would seem evident notation for the space of distributions on a smooth manifold $X$. However, [[Laurent Schwartz]] in his seminal work ([Schwartz 50](#Schwartz50)) used $\mathcal{D}(X)$ to denote the space $C^\infty_c(X)$ of compactly supported continuous functions, and then $\mathcal{D}'(X)$ for its linear continuous dual, hence for the space of distributions (see also [Hörmander 90, below def. 2.1.1](#Hoermander90)). 

=--

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Example

If $f \colon X \to \mathbb{R}$ is [[locally integrable function|locally integrable]], then for all test functions $\phi$ the [[Lebesgue integral]] 

$$\langle f, \phi\rangle = \int_X f(x)\phi(x) d x $$ 

is defined; in this way a function $f$ locally integrable over $X$ may be regarded as a distribution on $X$ (explaining both the sense in which distributions are "generalized functions" and a reason for the angle-bracket notation for the evaluation pairing). In particular, there is an obvious inclusion 

$$C_c^{\infty}(X) \hookrightarrow \mathcal{D}'(X)$$ 

and this inclusion turns out to be [[dense subset|dense]]. 

=--

Other notions of spaces of distributions, each endowed with the weak $*$-topology, include 

* [[compactly supported distributions]] on $U$. These are functionals on $C^{\infty}(U)$ (test functions without compact support). 

* Rapidly decaying distributions (usually on $U = \mathbb{R}^n$). These are functionals on the space of smooth functions each of whose partial derivatives (of any order) has "tempered" or moderate growth (i.e., bounded by polynomial growth). 

* Tempered distributions (usually on $U = \mathbb{R}^n$). These are functionals on so-called **Schwartz space**: the space of smooth functions each of whose derivatives (of any order) decays rapidly (goes to zero more quickly than any negative power of $|x|$ as $|x| \to \infty$). The topology on Schwartz space is induced by the family of seminorms 
$$\rho_{K, \alpha, \beta}(\phi) = \sup_{x \in K} |x^\alpha \partial^\beta \phi|$$ 
where $\alpha$, $\beta$ are multi-indices. 


+-- {: .num_prop #PullbackOfDistributionAlongSubmersion}
###### Proposition
**(pullback of distributions along submersion)**

If $X_1, X_2 \subset \mathbb{R}^n$ are two [[open subsets]] of [[Euclidean space]], and if

$$
  f \;\colon\; X_1 \overset{}{\longrightarrow} X_2
$$

is a [[submersion]] (i.e. its [[differential]] is a [[surjective function]] $d f_x \;\colon\; T_x X_1 \to T_{f(x)} X_2$ for all $x \in X_1$), then there is a unique [[continuous linear functional]]

$$
  f^\ast \;\colon\; \mathcal{D}'(X_2) \longrightarrow \mathcal{D}'(X_1)
$$

between spaces of distributions (def. \ref{DistributionOnOpenSubsetOfEuclideanSpace}) which extends the [[pullback of functions]] in that on a distribution represented by a [[bump function]] $b$ it is given by precomposition

$$
  f^\ast b = b \circ f
  \,.
$$

This is hence called the _pullback of distributions_.

=--

([Hörmander 90, theorem 6.1.2](#Hoermander90))

+-- {: .num_defn #DistributionsOnSmoothManifolds}
###### Definition
**(distributions of smooth manifolds)**

Let $X$ be a [[smooth manifold]]. Then a distribution on $X$ is an [[equivalence class]] of 

1. a choice of smooth [[atlas]] $\{\mathbb{R}^n \underoverset{\simeq}{\psi_i}{\longrightarrow} U_i \subset X\}_{i \in I}$;

1. for each $i \in I$ a distribution $\phi_i \;\colon\; C^\infty(\mathbb{R}^n)\to \mathbb{R}$ on the $i$th [[chart]], as above;

1. such that for all pairs $(i,j) \in I \times I$ these component distributions are related on intersections of charts by pullback of distributions (def. \ref{PullbackOfDistributionAlongSubmersion}) along the coordinate change maps:

   $\phi_j =  (\psi_i^{-1} \circ \psi_j)^\ast  \phi_i $.

=--

([Hörmander 90, def. 6.3.3](#Hoermander90))


### Characterization by monads
 {#CharacterizationByMonads}

(...) [Kock 11](#Kock11) (...)



## Operations on distributions 

### Inducing operations by dual extension

As $\mathcal{D}'(U)$ is dual to $C_c^\infty(U)$, each continuous linear operator on $C_c^\infty(U)$ induces a corresponding linear operator on $\mathcal{D}'(U)$ in the obvious way.  Given

$$
F\colon C_c^\infty(U) \to C_c^\infty(U)
$$

we define

$$
F^*\colon \mathcal{D}'(U) \to \mathcal{D}'(U)
$$

according to the usual formula for dualities

$$
F^* S(\phi) = S(F \phi).
$$

However, since there is an obvious inclusion $C_c^\infty(U) \to \mathcal{D}'(U)$ induced by the standard inner product on $C_c^\infty(U)$, what is more usually desired is not this dual operator but an **extension** operator.  That is, instead of $F^*$ we want an operator $F^\dagger \colon \mathcal{D}'(U) \to \mathcal{D}'(U)$ with the property that for $\phi \in C_c^\infty(U)$ then $F^\dagger(\phi) = F(\phi)$ (identifying $C_c^\infty(U)$ with its image in $\mathcal{D}'(U)$).  Being slightly more careful, let us write $\iota \colon C_c^\infty(U) \to \mathcal{D}'(U)$ for the inclusion induced by the inner product.  Then we want $F^\dagger(\iota \phi) = \iota (F(\phi))$.

If the extension exists, we have

$$
F^\dagger(\iota \phi)(\psi) = \iota(F(\phi))(\psi) = \langle F(\phi), \psi \rangle
$$

Now suppose that $F$ has an adjoint, say $F^+$, with respect to the inner product.  Note that this is not automatic since $C_c^\infty(U)$ is not a Hilbert space.  Moreover, even if $F$ extends to the Hilbert completion the Hilbertian adjoint may not work since it may not define a continuous linear map on the subspace $C_c^\infty(U)$.  But if $F^+$ does exist then we have

$$
F^\dagger(\iota \phi)(\psi) = \langle F(\phi), \psi \rangle = \langle \phi, F^+(\psi) \rangle
$$

In this case, the definition of $F^\dagger$ on the whole of $\mathcal{D}'(U)$ is obvious: simply take ${F^+}^*$.  That is, the dual operator to the adjoint to $F$.  In full, $F^\dagger \colon \mathcal{D}'(U) \to \mathcal{D}'(U)$ is defined via the formula

$$
\langle F^\dagger(S),\phi\rangle = \langle S, F^+(\phi) \rangle
$$

If the ground field is $\mathbb{C}$ then this carries through essentially unchanged except for the fact that one does **not** use the inner product on $C_c^\infty(U)$ but rather the associated bilinear pairing

$$
(\phi,\psi) = \int_U \phi \psi
$$

This is to ensure that the inclusion $C_c^\infty(U) \to \mathcal{D}'(U)$ is complex linear and not conjugate linear.  Otherwise extending operators becomes complex.

Two instances are of particular importance: 

* Multiplication by a smooth function $\theta$. If $\theta$ is any smooth function on $U$ (not necessarily compactly supported), then we can define $\theta \cdot S$ by observing that this multiplication is self-adjoint: 
$$\langle \theta \cdot \phi, \psi \rangle = \langle \phi, \psi \cdot \theta\rangle$$
where $\phi, \psi$ are arbitrary test functions.  Thus we define $\theta \cdot S$ by
$$\langle \theta \cdot S, \psi \rangle = \langle S, \theta \cdot \psi$$

* Differentiation. If $\partial^i$ is partial differentiation with respect to the $i^{th}$ coordinate, then for test functions $\psi$, $\phi$ we have 
$$\int_U \partial^i(\psi)(x) \phi(x)\; d x = -\int_U \psi(x) \partial^i(\phi)(x)\; d x$$ 
by simple integration by parts and the fact that $\phi$, $\psi$ are compactly supported.  Thus differentiation is _skew_-adjoint and so we define the extension to distributions by 
$$\langle \partial^i(S), \phi\rangle = -\langle S, \partial^i(\phi) \rangle$$ 
for all test functions $\phi$. In general, 
$$\langle \partial^\alpha S, \phi\rangle = (-1)^{|\alpha|}\langle S, \partial^\alpha \phi \rangle$$
where $|\alpha| = \alpha_1 + \ldots + \alpha_n$ is the total degree of the multi-index. 

Thus derivatives of distributions are defined to all orders. Some examples are given in the section "examples".

### Multiplication of Distributions
 {#MutliplicationsOfDistributions}

See at _[[mutliplication of distributions]]_

## Examples 

As explained above, any locally integrable function on $U$ defines a distribution on $U$. Other examples may be produced fairly cheaply by restriction of functionals on various TVS which contain the test functions. 

For instance: if $C_c(U)$ denotes the space of real-valued continuous functions with compact support in $U$ (topologized by uniform convergence on compacta), then a functional $\mu: C_c(U) \to \mathbb{R}$ is essentially the same as a signed measure on $U$ (Riesz-Markov theorem), i.e., there is a unique signed measure $d m$ for which 

$$\mu(\phi) = \int_U \phi d m.$$ 

Since the inclusion $i: C_c^\infty(U) \hookrightarrow C_c(U)$ is continuous, it follows that a measure $\mu$ defines a distribution by simple restriction along $i$: 

$$C_c^\infty(U) \overset{i}{\to} C_c(U) \overset{\mu}{\to} \mathbb{R}$$ 

Specializing further, consider any function of bounded variation on $U = \mathbb{R}$, say a bounded monotone increasing function $\alpha$. Then the Riemann-Stieltjes integral 

$$\int_{\mathbb{R}} f(x) d\alpha(x)$$ 

is defined for all functions $f$ with compact support; this provides a measure $d\alpha$ and hence a distribution. 

A prototypical example of this is provided by the Heaviside function: $H(x) = 1$ if $x \gt 0$, else 0. ("Heaviside": what a great pun!) Here we have, for all $f \in C_c(\mathbb{R})$, 

$$\langle f, d H \rangle = \int_{\mathbb{R}} f(x) d H(x) = f(0)$$ 

As a distribution, the Heaviside measure is the famous **[[Dirac distribution]]**. The long-standing intuitive practice among physicists and engineers is to write 

$$d H(x) = \delta_0(x) d x$$ 

where of course the function $H(x)$ doesn't have a derivative in the classical sense (i.e., as a function), but as a distribution, it does. Meanwhile, $H(x)$ is itself the derivative of a continuous function: $G(x) = \max\{x, 0\}$. 

For an example of a distribution on $\mathbb{R}$ which does not arise from a measure, consider the derivative of the Dirac distribution. (As a functional, it maps a test function $\phi$ to $-\phi'(0)$.) 

These examples are by no means curiosities. A fairly deep theorem is that _every_ distribution arises as a linear combination of derivatives of continuous functions:  

**Theorem:** Let $S$ be a distribution on an open domain $U \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n$. Then, there exist a finite collection $A$ of multi-indices $\alpha$ and continuous functions $g_\alpha$ defined on $U$ for which 

$$S = \sum_{\alpha \in A} \partial^\alpha g_\alpha$$ 

## Applications 

Distributions rigorously address a need long-felt by physicists to mathematically represent objects such as point particles of mass $m$ at position $a$ (where one would use the distribution $m\delta(x-a)$). They thus appear in accounts of quantum theory which attempt to achieve mathematical rigor. An example of this tendency can be seen in axiomatic formulations of quantum field theory such as the [[Wightman axioms]]. 

A brief survey of applications of distribution theory to perturbative quantum field theory may be found [here](http://www1.jinr.ru/Archive/Pepan/v-31-7a/I_ktp_04_t.pdf). 
  

Within mathematics, distributions are quite commonplace; for example, de Rham appropriated them for his theory of [[current]]s. Distribution theory has also long been used in the theory of partial differential equations. Here is a sample theorem: 

* **Theorem (Ehrenpreis, Malgrange):** Let $D$ be a linear differential operator on $\mathbb{R}^n$ with constant coefficients. Given a compactly supported smooth function $f$ on $\mathbb{R}^n$, there exists a smooth solution $u$ to the equation $D u = f$. 

A proof is given in these [notes](http://www-math.mit.edu/~helgason/hormander.pdf) by Helgason. The basic idea is to prove there exists a **fundamental solution** of $D$, i.e., a distribution $T$ such that $D T = \delta_0$. Then $u = f * T$ is smooth. The existence of a fundamental solution involves a theorem of Paley-Wiener type. 

## Varitants

### In synthetic differential geometry 

There is another point of view on distributions: that they _can_ be modeled by actual functions provided that one admits infinite and infinitesimal quantities of the type used in Robinson nonstandard analysis. One particular approach is to formulate axiomatically the theory of distributions so that it can be interpreted in [[smooth topos]]es that model the axioms of [[synthetic differential geometry]] and support a suitable notion of invertible [[infinitesimal object]]s and infinitely large integers.

This is discussed in chapter VII, section 3 of

* [[Ieke Moerdijk]], [[Gonzalo Reyes]], [[Models for Smooth Infinitesimal Analysis]]

which closely mirrors the original treatment in Robinson's book Non-standard Analysis. Examples of models that support these axioms are the toposes $\mathcal{Z}$ and $\mathcal{B}$ described there. 

### Lawvere distributions

See [[Lawvere distribution]].

### Currents

In $\mathbb{R}^n$ the distributions and generalized functions boil down to the same thing, so the terminology identifies them. But on a manifold, the distributions/generalized densities (functionals on test functions) and generalized functions (functionals on test *densities*) do not agree. See V. Guillemin, S. Sternberg: _Geometric asymptotics_ ([free online](http://www.ams.org/online_bks/surv14)). While generalized functions pull back, distributions/generalized densities push forward (under some conditions, though). 

More generally one can study generalized differential $k$-forms in local coordinates they look like $\sum f_\alpha dx^{\alpha_1}\wedge \cdot \wedge dx^{\alpha_k}$. Usually they are called **currents**. They are useful e.g. in the study of higher dimensional residua in higher dimensional complex geometry (cf. *Principles of algebraic geometry* by Griffiths and Harris) and in geometric measure theory (cf. the monograph by Federer).  

### Hyperfunctions and Coulombeau distributions

Sometimes one considers larger spaces of distributions, where worse singularities than in Schwarz theory are allowed. Most well known are the theory of _[[hyperfunctions]]_ and the theory of **Coulombeau distributions**. 

### Distributions from nonstandard analysis

Distributions can be alternatively described using [[nonstandard analysis]], see there. 

## Related concepts

* [[derivative of a distribution]]

* [[order of a distribution]]

* [[support of a distribution]]

* [[scaling degree of a distribution]]

* [point-supported distribution]]

* [[extension of distributions]]

## References

See also _[[hyperfunction]]_, [[ultradistribution]] and references therein.

### General

The original articles include

* {#Schwartz50} [[Laurent Schwartz]], _Théorie des distributions_, 1–2 , Hermann  (1950–1951)

* [[I. M. Gel'fand]], G.E. Shilov, _Generalized functions_, 1–5 , Acad. Press  (1966–1968) transl. from И. М. Гельфанд, Г. Е. Шилов Обобщенные функции, вып. 1-3, М.:Физматгиз, 1958; 1: Обобщенные функции и действия над ними, 2: Пространства основных обобщенных функций, 3: Некоторые вопросы теории дифференциальных уравнений

* E. Magenes, G. Stampacchia, _Teoria delle distribuzioni_, Lectures Given at a Summer School of the Centro Internazionale Matematico Estivo (C.i.m.e.) Held in Saltino (Firenza) Italy, September 1-9, 1961; C.I.M.E., Ed. Cremonese, Roma, 1961; reprinted as CIME __24__, Springer 2011 [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-10967-6)
    
Modern accounts include

* {#Hoermander90} [[Lars Hörmander]], _The analysis of linear partial differential operators_, vol. I, Springer 1983, 1990

* M. Kunzinger, R. Steinbauer, _Foundations of a nonlinear distributional geometry_, Acta Appl. Math. __71__, 179-206 (2002)

* M. Grosser, E. Farkas, M. Kunzinger, R. Steinbauer, _On the foundations of nonlinear generalized functions I, II_, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. __153__ (2001)

Lecture notes include

* Hasse Carlsson, _Lecture notes on distributions_ ([pdf](http://www.math.chalmers.se/~hasse/distributioner_eng.pdf))

Applications of distributions in [[physics]] are discussed in 

* V. S. Vladimirov, _Generalized functions in mathematical physics_. Moskva, Nauka 1980, Mir 1979; _Equations of mathematical physics_, Mir 1984

* N. N. Bogolyubov, A. A. Logunov, I.T. Todorov, _Introduction to axiomatic quantum field theory_, Benjamin  (1975)

In theorem 5.1.1 of 

* [[Alfred Frölicher]], [[Andreas Kriegl]], _Linear spaces and differentiation theory_, Wiley 1988. 

the [[convenient vector space]] of Schwartz distributions of compact support is characterized by a [[monad|monadic]] construction.
In generalization of this, an abstract formalization of distributions in [[category theory]]/[[universal algebra]] is discussed in 

* {#Kock11} [[Anders Kock]], _Commutative monads as a theory of distributions_ ([arxiv/1108.5952](http://arxiv.org/abs/1108.5952))
 

following the formalization of "[[intensive and extensive]]" in 

* {#Lawvere86} [[William Lawvere]], Introduction to _[[Categories in Continuum Physics]], Lectures given at a Workshop held at SUNY, Buffalo 1982. Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1174. 1986
 

Application of distributions in [[perturbative quantum field theory]] is discussed in

* {#Scharf95} [[Günter Scharf]] _[[Finite Quantum Electrodynamics -- The Causal Approach]]_, Springer 1995 ([ZMATH entry] (http://www.zentralblatt-math.org/zmath/en/advanced/?q=an:0844.53052&format=complete))

For more on this see the references at _[[locally covariant perturbative quantum field theory]]_.

See also 

* Springer online [[eom]], _[generalized function](http://eom.springer.de/g/g043810.htm)_



### On Colombeau's functions

* J. F. Colombeau, _New generalized functions and multiplications of distributions_, North Holland, Amsterdam (1984); _Elementary introduction in new generalized functions_, North Holland (1985)
* N. Djapić, S. Pilipović, _Microlocal analysis of Colombeau’s generalized functions on a manifold_, Indag. Math. N.S. 7, 293–309 (1996)
* Stevan Pilipović, Milica Žigić, _Suppleness of the sheaf of algebras of generalized functions on manifolds_, J. Math. Anal. Appl. __379__:2 (2011) 482–486, [arxiv/1101.4552](http://arxiv.org/abs/1101.4552), [MR2784335](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=2784335), [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmaa.2010.12.060)

category: analysis

[[!redirects distributions]]

[[!redirects generalized function]]
[[!redirects generalized functions]]

[[!redirects Schwartz distribution]]
[[!redirects Schwartz distributions]]


[[!redirects linear distribution]]
[[!redirects linear distributions]]

