
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--


> under construction

#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea

While [[classical mechanics]] considers deterministic evolution of particles and fields, quantum physics follows nondeterministic evolution where the probability of various outcomes of measurement may be predicted from the state in a Hilbert space representing the possible reality: that state undergoes a unitary evolution, what means that the generator of the evolution is $\sqrt{-1}$ times a Hermitean operator called the *quantum Hamiltonian* or the [[Hamiltonian operator]] of the system. The theoretical framework for describing this precisely is the __quantum mechanics__. It involves a constant of nature, Planck constant $h$; some quantum systems with spatial interpretation in the limit $h\to 0$ lead to classical mechanical systems (not all: some phenomena including non-integer spin are purely quantum mechanical, but the properties depending on their existence survive in the "classical" limit); in limited generality, one can motivate and find the *nonfunctorial* procedure to single out a [[right inverse]] to taking this *classical limit* under the name [[quantization]]. 

While quantum mechanics may be formulated for a wide range of physical systems, interpreted as particles, extended particles and fields, the quantum mechanics of fields is often called the [[quantum field theory]] and the quantum mechanics of systems of a fixed finite number of particles is often view as the quantum mechanics in a narrow sense. 

##### nPOV

Mathematically, despite the basic formalism of quantum mechanics which is sound and clear, there are two big areas which are yet not clear. One is to understand quantization, in all cases -- of particles, fields, strings and so on. The second and possibly more central to nLab is a problem how to define rigorously a wide range of quantum field theories and some related quantum mechanical systems like the hypothetical [[superstring theory]]. Regarding that this is a central goal, we also put emphasis on the interpretation of quantum mechanics via the picture which is a special case of a FQFT, and where the time evolution functorially leads to evolution operators. 

## Classical approach: Hilbert space quantum mechanics

In pure state quantum mechanics, physical states are encoded as vectors in a [[Hilbert space]]. Often Dirac "bra-ket" notation is used to represent such vectors, where $|\psi\rangle$ represents a state and $\langle\psi|$ represents its linear adjoint. State evolutions are expressed as unitary maps. Self-adjoint operators represent physical quantities such such as position and [[momentum]] and are called observables. Measurements are expressed as sets of projectors onto the eigenvectors of an observable.

In [[mixed state]] quantum mechanics, physical states are represented as [[density operators]] $\rho$, state evolution as maps of the form $\rho \mapsto U^\dagger \rho U$ for unitary maps $U$, and measurements are positive operator-valued measures (POVM's). There is a natural embedding of pure states into the space of density matrices: $|\psi\rangle \mapsto |\psi\rangle\langle\psi|$. So, one way to think of mixed states is a probabilistic mixture of pure states.

\[ \rho = \sum_i a_i |\psi_i\rangle\langle\psi_i| \]

Composite systems are formed by taking the tensor product of Hilbert spaces. If a [[pure state]] $|\Psi\rangle \in H_1 \otimes H_2$ can be written as $|\psi_1\rangle \otimes |\psi_2\rangle$ for $|\psi_i\rangle \in H_i$ it is said to be _[[separable]]_. If no such $|\psi_i\rangle$ exist, $|\Psi\rangle$ is said to be _[[entangled]]_. If a mixed state is separable if it is the sum of separable pure states. Otherwise, it is entangled.

States, state evolutions, and observables are all special cases of [[quantum channels]] which can be used to describe the exchange of classical and quantum [[information]].

## nPOV for quantum mechanics of point particles

Quantum mechanics of point particles may be understood as a special case of the formalism of [[quantum field theory]]. It is interpreted as the quantum analog of the [[classical mechanics]] of point particles. Of course, we can take a configuration space of a system of particles looking like the configuration space of a single particle in a higher dimensional manifold. 

Remark: related query on the relation between QFT and quantum mechanics (of particles and in general) can be found [here](http://www.math.ntnu.no/~stacey/Mathforge/nForum/comments.php?DiscussionID=2573&Focus=22060#Comment_22060). 

One may usefully think of the quantum mechanics of a point particle propagating on a [[manifold]] $X$ as being $(0+1)$-dimensional [[quantum field theory]]:

the fields of this system are maps $\Sigma \to X$ where $\Sigma \in Riem Bord_1$ are 1-dimensional [[Riemannian manifold]] [[cobordism]]s. These are the _trajectories_ of the particle. 

After [[quantization]] this yields a 1-dimensional [[FQFT]] given by a [[functor]]

$$
  U(-) : Riem Bord_1 \to Hilb
$$

from [[cobordism]]s to [[Hilbert space]]s (or some other flavor of [[vector space]]s) that assigns

* to the point the _space of states_ $\mathcal{H}$, typically the space of $L_2$-sections (with respect to a [[Riemannian metric]] on $X$) of the background [[gauge field]] on $X$ under which the particle in question is charged 

* to the cobordism of Riemannian length $t$ the operator

  $$
    U(t) := \exp\left(\frac{t}{i \hbar } H \right)
    : \mathcal{H} \to \mathcal{H}
    \,,
  $$

  where $H$ is the [[Hamiltonian operator]], typically of the form $H = \nabla^\dagger \circ \nabla $ for $\nabla$ the [[covariant derivative]] of the given background [[gauge field]].

Such a setup describes the quantum mechanics of a particle that feels forces of backgound [[gravity]] encoded in the [[Riemannian metric]] on $X$ and forces of background gauge fields (such as the [[electromagnetic field]]) encoded in the covariant derivative $\nabla$.


## Quantum physics in general #

More generally, _quantum physics_ is all the known physics not including [[classical physics]] in wider sense; it includes relativistic and nonrelativistic phenomena. Quantum mechanics is the standard formalism with the Hilbert space, unitary evolution etc. which explains theoretically phenomena of quantum physics: in this generality of the formalism a la von Neumann, it includes the quantum field theory. Quantum statistical mechanics in fact uses some additional assumptions not in exact quantum mechanics, which are believed to be derivable eventually (like quantum ergodicity etc.). Thus quantum statistical mechanics may or may not be included within quantum mechanics. 

Remark: Another way to look at quantum processes is via [[quantum channels]] which are completely positive trace-preserving maps.

For a previous query about quantum physics (includes experimental phenomena) and quantum mechanics (formalism for such, sometimes with or without statistical principles) see [here](http://www.math.ntnu.no/~stacey/Mathforge/nForum/comments.php?DiscussionID=2573&Focus=22059#Comment_22059).




## Quantum mechanics in terms of $\dagger$-compact categories

Many aspects of quantum mechanics and [[quantum computation]] depend only on the abstract properties of [[Hilb]] characterized by the fact that it is a [[†-compact category]]. 

For more on this see

* [[quantum mechanics in terms of †-compact categories]].


## Related concepts

* [[classical mechanics]]

* [[semiclassical approximation]], [[quantization]]

* [[supersymmetric quantum mechanics]]

## References

* Glimm and Jaffe, [[Glimm-Jaffe|Quantum physics%3A a functional integral point of view]] (how to quote the link with : ??)

* Movshev's course has mathematically nice references: [link](http://www.math.sunysb.edu/~mmovshev/MAT570Spring2008/syllabusfinal.html); and [here](http://www.math.columbia.edu/~woit/qftnotes1.pdf) is a link to Woit's list of more physical tradition references. 

* [[Klaas Landsman]], _[[Mathematical Topics Between Classical and Quantum Mechanics]]_


* P. Cartier, C. DeWitt-Morette, _Functional integration: action and symmetries_, Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics, 2006.

* Leon Takhtajan, [[Quantum mechanics for mathematicians]], Amer. Math. Soc. 2008. 

[[!redirects quantum physics]]
[[!redirects quantum theory]]

[[!redirects quantum mechanical system]]
[[!redirects quantum mechanical systems]]