pages/264.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]=--
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In the category of 'spaces', by 'invariants' we often mean 'homotopy invariants', so as well as giving a functor on the category of spaces taking values, say, in the category of Abelian groups, such an invariant also induces one on the 'homotopy category', that is the category of spaces and homotopy classes of maps between them.  This 'homotopy category' construction can be viewed as a general construction on categories having a congruence relation on their hom-sets, and hence as a sort of way of extracting an interesting and hopefully more tractable, category from a 'higher category' of some sort, perhaps a 2-category or more generally an $(\infty,1)$-category. The relationship between the higher category, the basic category, say of spaces, and this 'homotopy category' is simple, but needs looking at from the nPOV.

Quite often one encounters an ordinary [[category]] $C$ which is known in some way or other to be the $1$-[[1-category|categorical]] truncation of a [[higher category theory|higher category]] $\hat C$. 
Standard examples include the categories [[SimpSet]] of [[simplicial set]]s (or [[Top]] of [[topological space]]s) and $Ch(Ab)$ of [[chain complex]]es of [[abelian group]]s. Both are obtained from full [[(infinity,1)-category|(infinity,1)-categories]] by forgetting higher morphisms.

The most important information that is lost by forgetting the higher morphisms of a higher category is that about which 1-morphisms are, while not [[isomorphism]]s, invertible up to higher cells, i.e. [[equivalence]]s. 

To the full $(\infty,1)$-category $\hat C$ is canonically associated a 1-category $Ho(\hat C)$ called the [[homotopy category of an (infinity,1)-category]], which is obtained from $\hat C$ not by simply forgetting the higher morphisms, but by quotienting them out, i.e. by remembering the _equivalence classes_ of 1-morphisms. In the $(\infty,1)$-category [[Top]] (restricted to sufficiently nice objects, such as compactly generated weakly Hausdorff topological spaces) these higher morphisms are literally the [[homotopy|homotopies]] between 1-morphisms, and more generally one tends to address higher cells in $(\infty,1)$-categories as homotopies. Therefore the name _homotopy category of an $(\infty,1)$-category_ for $Ho(\hat C)$. In particular $Ho(\hat{Top})$ is the standard homotopy category originally introduced in topology.


Now a slightly different viewpoint comes in that interacts neatly with this one of 'dividing out by 1-morphisms'.  Suppose we are given just the truncated 1-category $C$, but now equipped with the structure of a [[category with weak equivalences]] which indicates which morphisms in $C$ are to be regarded as equivalences in a higher categorical context, there is a universal solution to the problem of finding a category $Ho(C)$ equipped with a functor $Q : C \to Ho(C)$ such that $Q$ sends all (morphisms labeled as) weak equivalences in 
$C$ to isomorphisms in $Ho(C)$.

In good situations, one may also find an $(\infty,1)$-category $\hat C$ corresponding to $C$, and the notions of homotopy category $Ho(C)$ and $Ho(\hat C)$ then coincide. 

This is, in particular, the case when $C$ is equipped with the structure of a combinatorial [[simplicial model category]] and $\hat C$ is the $(\infty,1)$-category [[presentable (infinity,1)-category|presented]] by $C$ with its model structure. (For instance [[Higher Topos Theory|HTT, remark A.3.1.8]]).

 We thus have several interrelated notions of homotopy category, which in most useful contexts more or less coincide.  Because of that, the term tends to be used widely, and the context then determines the exact definition to apply. We will give some of the most common ones, selected for their use in other entries.

##Definition (for a simplicially enriched category)

Given a simplicially enriched category $C$, we can form for each pair of objects, $x,y$, of objects of $C$, the set, $\pi_0C(x,y)$, of connected components of the 'function space' $C(x,y)$.  As $\pi_0$ preserves finite limits, this gives a category, denoted $\pi_0(C)$.  As 1-simplices in $C(x,y)$ can be often interpreted as being homotopies, this category $\pi_0(C)$ is often called the _homotopy category of $C$_, and then the notation $Ho(C)$ may be used.  


This notions is closely related to the next, by using, say the [[hammock localisation]] of Dwyer and Kan, as then $\pi_0$ of that simplicially enriched category, coincides with the following.

## Definition (for a category with weak equivalences)

Given a [[category with weak equivalences]] (such as a [[model category]]), its __homotopy category__ $Ho(C)$ is -- if it exists -- the [[category]] which is universal with the property that there is a [[functor]]

$$
 Q :  C \to Ho(C)
$$

that sends every weak equivalence in $C$ to an [[isomorphism]] in $Ho(C)$. 

One also writes $Ho(C) := W^{-1}C$ or $C[W^{-1}]$ and calls it the [[localization]] of $C$ at the collection $W$ of weak equivalences.

More in detail, the universality of $Ho(C)$ means the following:

* for any (possibly [[large category|large]]) category $A$ and functor $F : C \to A$ such that $F$ sends all $w \in W$ to isomorphisms in $A$, there exists a functor $F_Q : Ho(C) \to A$ and a natural isomorphism

$$
  \array{
     C &&\stackrel{F}{\to}& A
     \\
     \downarrow^Q& \Downarrow^{\simeq}& \nearrow_{F_Q}
     \\
     Ho(C)
  }
$$


* the functor $Q^* : Func(Ho(C),A) \to Func(C,A)$ is a [[full and faithful functor]].


The second condition implies that the functor $F_Q$ in the first condition is unique up to unique isomorphism.


## Properties

* If it exists, the homotopy category $Ho(C)$ is unique up to [[equivalence of categories]].



* As described at [[localization]], in general, the morphisms of $Ho(C)$ must be constructed using zigzags of morphisms in $C$ in which the backwards-pointing arrows are weak equivalences.  This means that in general, $Ho(C)$ need not be [[locally small category|locally small]] even if $C$ is.  However, in many cases (such as any [[model category]]) there is a more direct description of the morphisms in $Ho(C)$ as [[homotopy]] classes of maps in $C$ between suitably "good" (fibrant and cofibrant) objects.

* In [[2-limit|2-categorical terms]], the homotopy category $Ho(C)$ is the _coinverter_ of the canonical 2-cell
$$\array{& \to \\ W & \Downarrow & C\\ & \to}$$
where $W$ is the category whose objects are morphisms in $W$ and whose morphisms are commutative squares in $C$.



## Examples

* In classical [[homotopy theory]], _the_ homotopy category refers to the homotopy category [[Ho(Top)]] of [[Top]] with weak equivalences taken to be [[weak homotopy equivalences]].

* [[Ho(Top)]] is often restricted to the [[full subcategory]] of spaces of the [[homotopy type]] of a [[CW-complex]] (the full subcategory of CW-complexes in $Ho(Top)$). This is equivalent to $Ho(sSet_{Quillen})$, the homotopy category of the standard Quillen-[[model structure on simplicial sets]]. This equivalence is one aspect of the [[homotopy hypothesis]].

* In [[homological algebra]] the localization of the [[category of chain complexes]] at the [[quasi-isomorphisms]] is called the _[[derived category]]_. But see also at _[[homotopy category of chain complexes]]_.

* In [[stable homotopy theory]] one considers the [[stable homotopy category]] of [[spectra]].

* In [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]] one considers the [[equivariant stable homotopy category]] of spectra.

* For the homotopy category of [[Cat]], see [[Ho(Cat)]].

## Related concepts

* [[homotopy category of an (infinity,1)-category]]

* [[homotopy 2-category]]


## References

See the references at [[model category]].

[[!redirects homotopy categories]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 106953 Revision date: 2016-03-29 06:22:08 Page name: homotopy category Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 195.37.209.180

pages/264.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]=--
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea
 {#Idea}

Given a [[category with weak equivalences]] $(\mathcal{C},W)$, then its _homotopy category_ $Ho(\mathcal{C})$ is, if it exists, the result of universally forcing the [[weak equivalences]] to become actual [[isomorphisms]], also called the _[[localization]]_ at the weak equivalences

$$
  \mathcal{C} \longrightarrow Ho(\mathcal{C})= \mathcal{C}[W^{-1}]
  \,.
$$

The classical example is the category of [[topological spaces]] with weak equivalences those [[continuous functions]] which are _[[homotopy equivalences]]_ or _[[weak homotopy equivalences]]_. The corresponding homotopy category is often referred to as "the homotopy category", by default, or the "[[classical homotopy category]]" for emphasis. This turns out to be equivalent to the category of topological spaces or (for weak homotopy equivalences) of just those [[homeomorphism|homoemorphic]] to [[CW-complexes]] with [[left homotopy]]-[[homotopy class|classes]] of continuous functions between them, whence the name "homotopy category".

The existence of a homotopy category, as well as tractable presentations of it typically require extra [[properties]] of the class of weak equivalences (such as that they admit a [[calculus of fractions]]) or even extra [[structure]] (such as [[fibration category]]/[[cofibration category]] structure, or full [[model category]] structure, or further enhancements of that to [[simplicial model category]] structures, etc).

More generally, to every [[(∞,1)-category]] is associated a homotopy category, whose morphisms are literally the [[homotopy classes]] of the original morphisms (see also at _[[homotopy category of an (∞,1)-category]]_).

These two concepts of "homotopy category" are compatible: to a [[category with weak equivalences]] is associated, if it exsists, an [[(∞,1)-category]] obtained by universally forcing the [[weak equivalences]] to become actual [[homotopy equivalences]], also called the _[[simplicial localization]]_ $L_W \mathcal{C}$ at the weak equivalences. The homotopy categories of $(\mathcal{C},W)$ and of $L_W \mathcal{C}$ coincide, which justifies the terminology "homotopy category" generally.


## Definition

### For simplicially enriched categories

Given a simplicially enriched category $C$, we can form for each pair of objects, $x,y$, of objects of $C$, the set, $\pi_0C(x,y)$, of connected components of the 'function space' $C(x,y)$.  As $\pi_0$ preserves finite limits, this gives a category, denoted $\pi_0(C)$.  As 1-simplices in $C(x,y)$ can be often interpreted as being homotopies, this category $\pi_0(C)$ is often called the _homotopy category of $C$_, and then the notation $Ho(C)$ may be used.  


This notions is closely related to the next, by using, say the [[hammock localisation]] of Dwyer and Kan, as then $\pi_0$ of that simplicially enriched category, coincides with the following.

### For categories with weak equivalences

Given a [[category with weak equivalences]] (such as a [[model category]]), its __homotopy category__ $Ho(C)$ is -- if it exists -- the [[category]] which is universal with the property that there is a [[functor]]

$$
 Q :  C \to Ho(C)
$$

that sends every weak equivalence in $C$ to an [[isomorphism]] in $Ho(C)$. 

One also writes $Ho(C) := W^{-1}C$ or $C[W^{-1}]$ and calls it the [[localization]] of $C$ at the collection $W$ of weak equivalences.

More in detail, the universality of $Ho(C)$ means the following:

* for any (possibly [[large category|large]]) category $A$ and functor $F : C \to A$ such that $F$ sends all $w \in W$ to isomorphisms in $A$, there exists a functor $F_Q : Ho(C) \to A$ and a natural isomorphism

$$
  \array{
     C &&\stackrel{F}{\to}& A
     \\
     \downarrow^Q& \Downarrow^{\simeq}& \nearrow_{F_Q}
     \\
     Ho(C)
  }
$$


* the functor $Q^* : Func(Ho(C),A) \to Func(C,A)$ is a [[full and faithful functor]].


The second condition implies that the functor $F_Q$ in the first condition is unique up to unique isomorphism.


## Properties

* If it exists, the homotopy category $Ho(C)$ is unique up to [[equivalence of categories]].



* As described at [[localization]], in general, the morphisms of $Ho(C)$ must be constructed using zigzags of morphisms in $C$ in which the backwards-pointing arrows are weak equivalences.  This means that in general, $Ho(C)$ need not be [[locally small category|locally small]] even if $C$ is.  However, in many cases (such as any [[model category]]) there is a more direct description of the morphisms in $Ho(C)$ as [[homotopy]] classes of maps in $C$ between suitably "good" (fibrant and cofibrant) objects.

* In [[2-limit|2-categorical terms]], the homotopy category $Ho(C)$ is the _coinverter_ of the canonical 2-cell
$$\array{& \to \\ W & \Downarrow & C\\ & \to}$$
where $W$ is the category whose objects are morphisms in $W$ and whose morphisms are commutative squares in $C$.



## Examples

* In classical [[homotopy theory]], _the_ homotopy category refers to the homotopy category [[Ho(Top)]] of [[Top]] with weak equivalences taken to be [[weak homotopy equivalences]].

* [[Ho(Top)]] is often restricted to the [[full subcategory]] of spaces of the [[homotopy type]] of a [[CW-complex]] (the full subcategory of CW-complexes in $Ho(Top)$). This is equivalent to $Ho(sSet_{Quillen})$, the homotopy category of the standard Quillen-[[model structure on simplicial sets]]. This equivalence is one aspect of the [[homotopy hypothesis]].

* In [[homological algebra]] the localization of the [[category of chain complexes]] at the [[quasi-isomorphisms]] is called the _[[derived category]]_. But see also at _[[homotopy category of chain complexes]]_.

* In [[stable homotopy theory]] one considers the [[stable homotopy category]] of [[spectra]].

* In [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]] one considers the [[equivariant stable homotopy category]] of spectra.

* For the homotopy category of [[Cat]], see [[Ho(Cat)]].

## Related concepts

* [[homotopy category of an (infinity,1)-category]]

* [[homotopy 2-category]]


## References

See the references at [[model category]].

[[!redirects homotopy categories]]
