
Let $G$ be a Lie subgroup of $GL(n,F)$ where $F$ is the field of real or complex number or the division ring of quaternions. 
Chern-Weil theory is centered around the construction assigning to a smooth $G$-[[principal bundle]] over a [[manifold]], admitting a [[connection on a bundle|connection]], and a homogeneous  $G$-[[invariant polynomial]] $P$, a [[characteristic class]] given as the cohomology class $[P(F)]$ of the invariant polynomial applied to the [[curvature]] of 
any chosen connection on the fiber bundle (the cohomology class is independent of the choice of the connection). The algebra of $G$-[[invariant polynomial]]s is inside the [[Weil algebra]] and depends only on the tangent [[Lie algebra]] of $G$. There is a [[noncommutative geometry|noncommutative]] analogue due to Alekseev and Meinrenken.

See [[Weil homomorphism]].

#References#

* [[Johan Louis Dupont]], _Fibre bundles and Chern-Weil theory_, Lecture Notes Series __69__, Dept. of Math., University of Aarhus, Aarhus, 2003, 115 pp. [pdf](http://www.johno.dk/mathematics/fiberbundlestryk.pdf)

* [[Johan Louis Dupont]], _Curvature and characteristic classes_, Lecture Notes in Math. __640__, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1978. 

* A. Alekseev, E. Meinrenken, _The non-commutative Weil algebra_, Invent. Math. __139__, n. 1, 135-172, 2000, [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002229900025)

* [[Mikhail Postnikov|М. М. Постников]], _Лекции по геометрии. Семестр 4, Дифференциальная геометрия_ — М.: Наука, 1988	

* [[Raoul Bott|R. Bott]], L. W. Tu, _Differential forms in algebraic topology_, Graduate Texts in Mathematics __82__, Springer 1982. xiv+331 pp.

* V. Guillemin, S. Sternberg, _Supersymmetry and equivariant de Rham theory_, Springer, 1999.