A __Segal category__ is a [[simplicial space]] $X$ such that $X_0$ (the set of points) is a discrete [[simplicial set]] such that the [[Segal map]]
$$ \phi_k: X_k \to X_1 \times_{X_0} \cdots \times_{X_0} X_1 $$
(induced by $X(\alpha_i): X_k \to X_1$) assigned to $X$ is a [[weak equivalence]] of simplicial sets for $k \geq 2$.

Segal categories comprise one model for $(\infty,1)$-[[(infinity,1)-category|categories]].

A Segal category is a weak form of [[S-category|S-categories]], in which composition is only defined up to a coherent system of [[equivalence]]s.

Segal categories were defined in 1974 (implicitly) by [[Graeme Segal]]. They were named Segal categories first by William Dwyer--[[Daniel Kan]]--Jeffrey Smith in 1989. In their famous book _Homotopy invariant algebraic structures on topological spaces_, John Boardman and Rainer Vogt used [[quasi-category|quasi-categories]]; a quasi-category is a simplicial set satisfying the weak Kan condition, so quasi-categories are also called [[weak Kan complex]]es.  Both of these are [[Quillen equivalence|Quillen equivalent]] models of $(\infty,1)$-[[(infinity,1)-category|categories]].

+-- {: .query}
So is there any difference between a Segal category and a quasi-category?  It looks like the former is a simplicial *space* while the latter is a simplicial *set*, so it seems like there is; so then which were Boardman Vogt talking about?  ---Toby

Rafael: Boardman-Vogt did mean quasi-categories which are equivalent to Segal categories. I can not show this equivalence but see the paper of Julia Bergner <http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/math/pdf/0610/0610239v1.pdf>. But i think you already have seen this paper.

_Toby_:  Ah yes, I have, but sometimes I need to people to remind me what I already know.  (^_^)  Thanks!
=--


#References#

* Julia E. Bergner, _A survey of $(\infty, 1)$-categories_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.AT/0610239))
* see also [[Segal space]]


[[!redirects Segal categories]]