
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
#### 2-Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include 2-category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea ##

A _braided monoidal (weak) 2-category_ is a [[monoidal 2-category]] with a categorified version of a [[braided monoidal category|braiding]].

That is, it is a [[2-category]] $C$ equipped with a [[tensor product]] $\otimes : C \times C \to C$ [[2-functor]] which satisfies the first in a hierarchy of conditions for being commutative up to equivalence.  In the language of [[k-tuply monoidal n-category|k-tuply monoidal n-categories]], a braided monoidal 2-category is a *doubly monoidal 2-category*.  As described there, this may be identified with a pointed [[4-category]] with a single [[object]] and a single [[1-morphism]].  We can also say that it is a monoidal 2-category whose [[En-algebra|E1-algebra]] structure is refined to an [[En-algebra|E2-algebra]] structure.

## Properties

### Coherence theorem

* [[coherence theorem for braided monoidal bicategories]]

### Picard 2-groupoid

The [[Picard 2-groupoid]] of a braided monoidal 2-category is a [[braided 3-group]].

## Related concepts

* [[monoidal 2-category]], [[3-group]]

* **braided monoidal 2-category**, [[braided 3-group]]

* [[sylleptic monoidal 2-category]], [[sylleptic 3-group]]

* [[symmetric monoidal 2-category]], [[symmetric 3-group]]

* [[k-tuply monoidal (n,r)-category]]

## References


* {#Breen88} [[Lawrence Breen]], _Une lettre &#224; P. Deligne au sujet des $2$-cat&#233;gories tress&#233;es_ (1988) ([pdf](http://www.math.univ-paris13.fr/~breen/deligne.pdf))

* [[André Joyal]], [[Ross Street]], Section 5 of: _Braided tensor categories_, Adv. Math. **102** (1993), 20--78 ([doi:10.1006/aima.1993.1055](https://doi.org/10.1006/aima.1993.1055))

* [[Mikhail Kapranov]], [[Vladimir Voevodsky]], *2-Categories and Zamolodchikov tetrahedra equations*, in: _Proc. Symp. Pure Math._ **56** Part 2 (1994), AMS, Providence, pp. 177--260 ([doi:10.1090/pspum/056.2](https://doi.org/10.1090/pspum/056.2))

* [[Mikhail Kapranov]], [[Vladimir Voevodsky]], *Braided monoidal 2-categories and Manin-Schechtman higher braid groups*, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra Volume 92, Issue 3, 25 March 1994, Pages 241-267 (<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-4049(94)90097-3">doi:10.1016/0022-4049(94)90097-3</a>)

* [[John C. Baez]], [[Martin Neuchl]], *Higher-Dimensional Algebra I: Braided Monoidal 2-Categories*, Adv. Math. 121 (1996), 196-244 ([arXiv:q-alg/9511013](https://arxiv.org/abs/q-alg/9511013))

* [[Sjoerd E. Crans]], Section 2.2. of: *Generalized Centers of Braided and Sylleptic Monoidal 2-Categories*, Advances in Mathematics, Volume 136, Issue 2, 25 June 1998, Pages 183-223 ([doi:10.1006/aima.1998.1720](https://doi.org/10.1006/aima.1998.1720))


[[!redirects braided monoidal 2-categories]]
[[!redirects braided monoidal bicategory]]
[[!redirects braided monoidal bicategories]]

