
> This article is about the notion prevalent in [[category theory]] and [[homotopy theory]], also known as a Brandt groupoid. For the notion involving a globally defined binary operation, see [[magma]]. 


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}



## Idea

Where a _[[group]]_ may be thought of as a _group of transformations_ that [[isomorphism|isomorphically]] relates one [[object]] to itself (the _[[symmetries]]_ of one objects, such as the [[isometries]] of a [[polyhedron]]) a _groupoid_ is a collection of isomorphic transformations acting between possibly more than one object.

Hence a groupoid consists of a set of objects $x, y, z, \cdots$ and for each [[pair]] of objects $(x,y)$ there is a set of transformations, usually denoted by arrows

$$
  x \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} y
$$

which may be composed if they are composable (i.e. if the first ends where the second starts)

$$
  \array{
    && y
    \\
    & {}^{\mathllap{f}}\nearrow && \searrow^{\mathrlap{g}}
    x && \underset{g \circ f}{\longrightarrow}  && z
  }
$$

such that this composition is [[associativity|associative]] and such that for each object $x$ there is identity transformation $x \overset{id_X}{\longrightarrow} x$ in that this is a [[neutral element]] for the composition of transformations, whenever defined.

So far this structure is what is called a _[[small category]]_. What makes this a _([[small groupoid]]) groupoid_ is that all these transformations are to be "symmetries" in that they are [[invertible morphisms]] meaning that for each transformation $x \overset{f}{\longrightarrow} y$ there is a transformation the other way around $y \overset{f^{-1}}{\longrightarrow} x$ such that 

$$
  f^{-1} \circ f  = id_x 
  \phantom{AAAA}
  f \circ f^{-1} = id_y
  \,.
$$

If there is only a single object $x$, then this definition reduces to that of a [[group]], and in this sense groupoids are "groups with many objects". Conversely, given any groupoid $\mathcal{G}$ and a choice of one of its objects $x$, then the subcollection of transformations from and to $x$ is a group, sometimes called the [[automorphism group]] $Aut_{\mathcal{G}}(x)$ of $x$ in $\mathcal{G}$.

Just as for groups, the "transformations" above need not necessarily be given by concrete transformations (say by [[bijections]] between [[objects]] which are [[sets]]). Just as for groups, such a concrete realization is always possible, but is an extra choice (called a [[representation]] of the groupoid).

An archetypical example of a groupoid is the [[fundamental groupoid]] $\Pi_1(X)$ of a [[topological space]] (for introduction see [here](Introduction+to+Topology+--+2#Homotopy)): For $X$ a topological space, this is the groupoid whose 

* [[objects]] are the points $x \in X$;

* [[morphisms]] $x \overset{[\gamma]}{\longrightarrow} y$ are the [[homotopy relative boundary]]-[[equivalence classes]] $[\gamma]$ of [[paths]] $\gamma \colon [0,1] \to X$ in $X$, with $\gamma(0) = x$ and $\gamma(1) = y$; 

and [[composistion]] is given, on representatives, by [[concatenation]] of paths. Here the class of the [[reverse path]] $\bar\gamma \;\colon\; t \mapsto \gamma(1-t)$ constitutes the inverse morphism, making this a groupoid.

If one _chooses_ a point $x \in X$, then the corresponding group at that point is the _[[fundamental group]]_ $\pi_1(X,x) \coloneqq Aut_{\Pi_1(X)}(x)$ of $X$ at that point. 

This highlights one of the reasons for being interested in groupoids over groups: Sometimes this allows to avoid unnatural ad-hoc choices and it serves to streamline and simplify the theory. 

On the other hand, 


## Definition


+-- {: .num_defn #ExplicitDefinition}
###### Definition

A _small groupoid_ $G$ consists of a 

1. a [[set]] $G_0$ called its _set of objects_;

1. a [[set]] $G_1$ called its _set of [[morphisms]]_ or _set of arrows_ 

equipped with the following structure maps:

1. A pair of maps $s, t \colon G_1 \rightrightarrows G_0$ called _[[source]]_ and _[[target]]_ or _[[domain]]_ and _[[codomain]]_. An element $g\in G_1$ is thought of as an arrow from $x=s(g)$ to $y=t(g)$.

1. A multiplication or _[[composition]]_ map $m \colon G_1 \times_{s, G_0, t} G_1 \to G_1$, usually denoted as $g h$ for $m(g,h)$, which satisfies 

   1. $s(g h)=s(h)$, $t(g h)=t(g)$, and

   1. [[associativity]]: $(g h)k=g(h k)$, 

   1. identity section: $e: G_0\to G_1$, such that $e(t(g))g=g=ge(s(g))$ (in particular, $s\circ e= t \circ e$), 

   1. [[inverse]], $i: G_1 \to G_1$, also denoted by $i(g)=g^{-1}$, such that for all $g\in G$, 

      $ g^{-1} g = e(s(g)), \quad g g^{-1} = e(t(g)). $

=--

Hence a small groupoid is a [[small category]] in which all [[morphisms]] are [[isomorphism|isomorphisms]].  


A groupoid is called **tame** if its [[groupoid cardinality|cardinality]] is finite.

Groupoids naturally form a $2$-[[2-category|category]] (in fact a $(2,1)$-[[(2,1)-category|category]]) [[Grpd]]. For more on this see also the lecture notes at _[[geometry of physics -- homotopy types]]_.


## Notation

If $x,y$ are [[objects]] (also called [[vertices]]) of the groupoid $G$ then the set of [[morphisms]] (also called arrows) from $x$ to $y$ is written $G(x,y)$, or other notations for [[hom-sets]].  The set $G(x,x)$ (which is a [[group]] under composition) is also written $G(x)$ and called the _vertex group_ of $G$ at $x$.  It is also written $Aut_G(x)$ and called the [[automorphism group]] of $x$ in $G$, or written $\pi_1(G,x)$ and called the [[fundamental group]] of $G$ at $x$ (especially if you think of a groupoid as giving a [[homotopy 1-type]]).

As in any category, there is a question of notation for the [[composition]], and in particular of the order in which to write things. It can be more convenient to write the composition of $a:x \to y$ and $b: y \to z$ as $a b:x \to z$, although a more traditional notation would be $b a$.  The two conventions can be distinguished by writing $a; b$ or $b\circ a$ (which is the most traditional notation for categories).  See [[composition]] for further discussion.

A groupoid $G$ is _[[connected groupoid|connected]]_, or _[[transitive groupoid|transitive]]_, if $G(x,y)$ is nonempty for all $x,y \in Ob(G)$; it is called _[[inhabited groupoid|inhabited]]_, or _nonempty_, if it has at least one object. A [[maximal element|maximal]] inhabited connected [[subgroupoid]] of $G$ is called a _component_ of $G$, and $G$ is then the [[disjoint union]] (the [[coproduct]] in $\Grpd$) of its connected components. The set of components of $G$ is written $\pi_0(G)$ (especially if you think of a groupoid as giving a [[homotopy 1-type]]).


## Examples

1. Any [[group]] $H$ gives rise to a groupoid, sometimes denoted $\mathbf{B}H$ but often conflated with $H$ itself, which has exactly one object $*$ and with $\mathbf{B}H(*,*) = H$.  That is, there is an inclusion of categories $Group \to Groupoids$, and this functor has a left adjoint, giving the _universal group_ of a groupoid. Any inhabited connected groupoid is [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] to one arising in this way.

2. A [[disjoint union]] of (the one-object groupoids corresponding to) groups is naturally a groupoid, also called a _bundle of groups_.  The [[axiom of choice]] is equivalent to the claim that any groupoid is equivalent to one of this form.

3. From any [[group action|action]] of a [[group]] $H$ on a [[set]] $X$ we obtain an [[action groupoid]] or "[[weak quotient]]" $X/ \!\! /H$. This is also written $X \rtimes H$, a semidirect product, since it is a special case of the semidirext product of an action of a groupoid on a groupoid.  If $X=\{*\}$ this gives the groupoid $\mathbf{B}H$, above. 

4. A [[setoid]], that is a set $X$ equipped with an [[equivalence relation]] $E$, becomes a groupoid with the multiplication $(x,y);(y,z) = (x,z)$ for all $(x,y), (y,z) \in E$.  (This gives one reason for the forward notation for composition.)  Such a groupoid is equivalent to the [[discrete category]] on the [[quotient set]] $X/E$.

5. In particular, if $E$ is the universal relation $X \times X$, then we get the _[[square groupoid]]_ $X^2$, also called the _[[trivial groupoid]]_ on $X$. Despite the latter name, there is an important special case, namely the groupoid $I= \{0,1\}^2$. This groupoid has non-identity elements $\iota:0 \to 1, \iota^{-1}: 1 \to 0$, and can be regarded as a groupoid model of the unit [[interval]] $[0,1]$ in [[topology]].

6. Any [[topological space]] $X$ has a [[fundamental groupoid]] $\pi_1(X)$ whose objects are the [[points]] of $X$ and whose arrows are (homotopy classes rel end points of of) [[paths]], with composition by [[concatenation]] of paths.  Note that $\pi_0(\pi_1(X)) = \pi_0(X)$ is the set of [[path component|path components]] of $X$, and for any $x\in X$, $\pi_1(\Pi_1(X),x) = \pi_1(X,x)$ is the [[fundamental group]] of $X$ with basepoint $x$.  In theory one can obtain the higher [[homotopy groups]] in this way as well, by generalizing from the fundamental groupoid to the [[fundamental infinity-groupoid]].

7. More generally, if we choose some [[subset]] $S$ of the points of a space $X$, then we have a [[full subcategory|full subgroupoid]] of $\pi_1(X)$ containing only those points in $S$, denoted $\pi_1(X,S)$.  This can result in much more manageable groupoids; for instance $\Pi_1([0,1],\{0,1\})$ is the groupoid $I$ considered above, while $\Pi_1([0,1])$ has [[uncountable set|uncountably]] many objects (but is [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] to $I$).

8. If $\Gamma$ is a [[directed graph]] or [[quiver]], then the _[[free groupoid]]_ $F(\Gamma)$ is well defined. It is the left [[adjoint functor]] to the [[forgetful functor]] from groupoids to directed graphs. This shows an advantage of groupoids: the notion of _free equivalence relation_ or _free action groupoid_ does not easily make sense. But we can still talk of a presentation of an equivalence relation or action groupoid by [[generators and relations]], by considering presentations of groupoids instead. 

   +-- {: .query}
   [[Mike Shulman|Mike]]: It's not clear to me that the notion of "free equivalence relation" doesn't make sense.  Can't I talk about a left adjoint to the forgetful functor from equivalence relations to, say, directed graphs?  Maybe sets-equipped-with-a-binary-relation would be more appropriate, but either one works fine.

   [[Ronnie Brown|Ronnie]]: Are you sure this forgetful functor equivalence relations to directed graphs has a left adjoint? Suppose the directed graph $\Gamma$ has one vertex $x$ and one loop $u:x  \to x$. The free groupoid on $\Gamma$ is the group of integers, which as a groupoid is not an equivalence relation. 

   _Toby_:  But there is still a free [[setoid]] (set equipped with an equivalence relation) on $\Gamma$; it is the [[point]].  As a groupoid, it is not the same as the free groupoid on $\Gamma$, although it *is* the same as the free setoid on the free groupoid on $\Gamma$.  If there\'s an advantage to working with groupoids, perhaps it\'s that the free groupoid functor preserves distinctions that the free setoid functor forgets?  (In this case, a distinction preserved or forgotten is that between $\Gamma$ and the point, which as a graph does not have $u$.)
   =--

9. A [paper by Živaljević](#Zivaljevic) gives examples of groupoids used in combinatorics. 

10. The book "Topology and Groupoids" listed below takes the view that 1-dimensional homotopy theory, including the Seifert-van Kampen Theorem, the theory of covering spaces, and the less well known theory of the fundamental group(oid) of an orbit space by a discontinuous group action, is best presented using the notion of groupoid rather than group as basic. This had led in the 1960s to the question of the prospective use of (strict) groupoids in higher homotopy theory. One answer is given in the book [[Nonabelian algebraic topology]] discussed elsewhere on the nlab.  


## Properties

### Characterization as 2-coskeletal Kan complexes

Groupoids $K$ are equivalent to 1-[[hypergroupoids]], which are in particular 2-[[coskeletal]] [[Kan complex]]es $N(K)$ -- their [[nerve]]s. 

The objects of the groupoids are the 0-[[simplices]] and the morphisms of the groupoid are the 1-simplices of the Kan complex. The [[composition]] operation $(f,g) \mapsto g \circ f $ in the grouopoid is encoded in the 2-simplices of the Kan complex

$$
  \array{ 
    && y
    \\
    & {}^{\mathllap{f}}\nearrow &=& \searrow^{\mathrlap{g}}
    \\
    x &&\underset{g\circ f}{\to}&& z
  }
  \,.
$$


The [[associativity]] condition on the composition is exhibited by the 3-[[coskeleton]]-property of the Kan complex. This says that every simplicial 2-sphere in the Kan complex has a unique filler. With the above identification of 2-simplices with composition operations, this means that the 2 ways

$$
  \array{
    y &\stackrel{g}{\to}& &\to& z
    \\
    \uparrow && &\nearrow&  \downarrow^{\mathrlap{h}}
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{f}}\uparrow &^{\mathllap{g \circ f}}\nearrow& && \downarrow
    \\
    x &\underset{h \circ (g\circ f )}{\to}&&\to& w
  }
  \;\;\;
  and
  \;\;\;
  \array{
    y &\stackrel{g}{\to}& &\to& z
    \\
    \uparrow &\searrow& &&  \downarrow^{\mathrlap{h}}
    \\
    {}^{\mathllap{f}}\uparrow && &\searrow^{\mathrlap{h\circ g}}& \downarrow
    \\
    x &\underset{(h \circ g)\circ f}{\to}&&\to& w
  }
$$

of composing a sequence of three composable morphisms are equal

$$
  \array{
    y &\to& &\to& z
    \\
    \downarrow && &\nearrow&  \downarrow
    \\
    \downarrow &\nearrow& && \downarrow
    \\
    x &\to&&\to& w
  }
  \;\;\;
  \stackrel{=}{\to}
  \;\;\;
  \array{
    y &\to& &\to& z
    \\
    \downarrow &\searrow& &&  \downarrow
    \\
    \downarrow && &\searrow& \downarrow
    \\
    x &\to&&\to& w
  }
  \,.
$$


For handling just groupoids exclusively their description in terms of Kan complexes may be a bit of an overkill, but the advantage is that it embeds groupoids naturally in the more general context of [[2-groupoid]]s, [[3-groupoid]]s and eventually [[∞-groupoid]]s. For instance a [[pseudo-functor]] out of an ordinary groupoid into a 2-groupoid is simply a homomorphism of the corresponding Kan complexes. 

The disadvantage of the simplicial approach is the difficulty of describing multiple compositions in higher dimensions, an important idea which is quite conveniently  handled cubically. 


## Related concepts

[[!include homotopy n-types - table]]

* [[groupoid action]], [[groupoid-principal bundle]]

* [[topological groupoid]], [[Lie groupoid]], [[smooth groupoid]]

* [[stack]], [[geometric stack]]

* [[Hopf algebroid]]


## References

A motivation and introduction of the concept of groupoid and a tour of examples (including the refinement to [[topological groupoids]] and [[Lie groupoids]]) is in 

* [[Alan Weinstein]], _Groupoids: Unifying Internal and External Symmetry -- A Tour through some Examples_, Notices of the AMS volume 43, Number 7 ([pdf](http://www.ams.org/notices/199607/weinstein.pdf))

A page [Groupoids in Mathematics](http://pages.bangor.ac.uk/~mas010/gpdsweb.html) by Ronnie Brown includes the introductory text

* [[Ronnie Brown]], From groups to groupoids: A brief survey, ([pdf](http://pages.bangor.ac.uk/~mas010/pdffiles/groupoidsurvey.pdf))

Technical discussion is for instance in the following references.

* [[Philip Higgins]], 1971, _Categories and Groupoids_, van
Nostrand, New   York. Reprints in Theory and Applications of
Categories, 7 (2005) pp 1--195. ([download] (http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/reprints/articles/7/tr7abs.html))

* [[Philip Higgins]],  Presentations of Groupoids, with Applications to Groups, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 60 (1964) 7--20.

* [[Ronnie Brown]], _Topology and groupoids_, Booksurge, 2006. ([description] (http://pages.bangor.ac.uk/~mas010/topgpds.html))

* {#Zivaljevic} Rade T. Živaljević,  Groupoids in combinatorics---applications of a theory of local symmetries. _Algebraic and geometric combinatorics_, 305--324, Contemp. Math., 423, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2006.
  


[[!redirects groupoid]]
[[!redirects groupoids]]

[[!redirects tame groupoid]]
[[!redirects tame groupoids]]

[[!redirects 1-type]]
[[!redirects 1-types]]
[[!redirects homotopy 1-type]]
[[!redirects homotopy 1-types]]