
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Measure and probability theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include measure theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

It is practically impossible to model a macroscopic system in terms of the microscopic kinematical and dynamical variables of all its particles. Thus one makes a hierarchial reduction in which this complexity is reduced to small number of collective variables. The theoretical framewok for such reductions for systems is [[statistical mechanics]] or statistical physics.

One special case of hierarchial reduction is the limit of large volumes $V$, in which the number of particles (of each species) $N/V$ stays constant. This is called the **[[thermodynamic limit]]** in statistical physics. Under some standard assumptions like homogeneity (spacial and possibly directional) and stability (no transitory effects), there is a small number of collective variables characterizing the system. Such a description can be (and historically was) postulated as an independent self-consistent phenomenological theory even without going into the details of statistical mechanics; such a description is called **equilibrium thermodynamics**, which is believed to be deducable from statistical mechanics, as has been partially proved for some classes of systems. Sometimes transitional finite-time phenomena are described either statistically by studying stochastic processes or by a more elaborate hierarchial form of thermodynamics, so-called **nonequilibrium thermodynamics**. 

One of the basic characteristics of a thermodynamical system is its [[temperature]], which has no analogue in fundamental non-statistical physics. Other common thermodynamical variables include pressure, volume, [[entropy]], enthalpy etc. 

## Generalizations 

Some formal generalizations of thermodynamical formalism include mixing time and temperature in formalisms with complex time-temperature like Matsubara formalism in QFT. 

Mathematical analogies and generalizations include also 

* [[John Baez]], Mike Stay, _Algorithmic thermodynamics_, [pdf](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/thermo.pdf), [cafe](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2010/02/algorithmic_thermodynamics.html)
* [[M. Marcolli]], R. Thomgren, _Thermodynamical semirings_, [arXiv/1108.2874](http://arxiv.org/abs/1108.2874)
* M. Zinsmeister, _Thermodynamic formalism and holomorphic dynam-
ical systems_, Amer. Math. Soc. 2000.
* I. Itenberg, G. Mikhalkin, Geometry in the tropical limit, [arXiv/1108.3111](http://arxiv.org/abs/1108.3111)

## Literature and links

* $n$Lab: [[entropy]], [[relative entropy]], [[second law of thermodynamics]], [[generalized second law of thermodynamics|generalized second law]], [[KMS state]]
* wikipedia: [thermodynamics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermodynamics), [fundamental thermodynamic relation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_thermodynamic_relation)
* Azimuth Project: [Thermodynamics](http://www.azimuthproject.org/azimuth/show/Thermodynamics)
[[!redirects statistical mechanics]]
[[!redirects statistical physics]]