
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Topos Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* automatically generated table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A **small presheaf** on a category $C$ is a [[presheaf]] which is determined by a small amount of data.  If $C$ is itself [[small category|small]], then every presheaf on $C$ is small, but this is no longer true when $C$ is large.  In many cases, when $C$ is large, it is the small presheaves which seem to be more important and useful.

## Definition

Let $C$ be a [[category]] which is [[locally small category|locally small]], but possibly [[large category|large]].  A presheaf $F\colon C^{op}\to Set$ is **small** if it is the left [[Kan extension]] of some functor whose domain is a [[small category]], or equivalently if it is a small [[colimit]] of [[representable functors]].

Of course, if $C$ is itself small, then every presheaf is small.

## Categories of small presheaves

We write $P C$ for the category of small presheaves on $C$.  Observe that although the category of *all* presheaves on $C$ cannot be defined without the assumption of a [[Grothendieck universe|universe]], the category $P C$ can be so defined, using small diagrams in $C$ as proxies for small colimits of representable presheaves.  Moreover $P C$ is locally small, and there is a [[Yoneda embedding]] $C\hookrightarrow P C$.

Of course, if $C$ is small, then $P C$ is the usual category of all presheaves on $C$.

Since small colimits of small colimits are small colimits, $P C$ is [[cocomplete category|cocomplete]].  In fact, it is easily seen to be the [[free cocompletion]] of $C$, even when $C$ is not small.  It is not, in general, complete, but we can characterize when it is (cf. Day--Lack).

+-- {: .un_theorem}
###### Theorem
$P C$ is complete if and only if for every small diagram in $C$, the category of cones over that diagram has a small weakly terminal set, i.e. there is a small set of cones such that every cone factors through one in that set.
=--

+-- {: .un_cor}
###### Corollary
If $C$ is either complete or small, then $P C$ is complete.
=--

We also have:

+-- {: .un_theorem}
###### Theorem
If $C$ and $D$ are complete, then a functor $F\colon C\to D$ preserves small limits if and only if the functor $P F\colon P C \to P D$ (induced by left Kan extension) also preserves small limits.
=--

These results can all be generalized to [[enriched categories]], and also relativized to limits in some class $\Phi$ (which, for some purposes, we might want to assume to be "saturated").  See the paper by Day and Lack.


## References

* [[B. J. Day]], [[Steve Lack]], _Limits of small functors_, JPAA, <http://www.maths.usyd.edu.au/u/stevel/papers/small.pdf> 

* [[Boris Chorny]], [[William Dwyer]], _The homotopy theory of small diagrams over large categories_,  Forum Math. 21 (2009), no. 2, 167--179; [preprint](http://math.haifa.ac.il/chorny/publications/Chorny,%20Dwyer%20-%20SmallFunctors.pdf)
  
The results of Chorny--Dwyer are cited by Rosicky in _Accessible categories and homotopy theory_,  <http://www.math.yorku.ca/~tholen/HB07Rosicky.pdf>

[[!redirects small presheaves]]
[[!redirects small functor]]
[[!redirects small functors]]