**Linguistics** is the (scientific) study of natural human language. See a reasonably good page at [wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistics). 

In [[mathematics]] and [[computer science]], we are however also interested in artificial analogues of natural languages: [[formal language|formal]] and [[computer language|computer]] [[language]]s. 


## Formal Linguistics

Linguists often attempt to specify formal grammars (such as [[context free grammar]]s) which generate exactly the strings of a human language. The derivation trees of such strings are often interpreted in a formal system such as [[typed lambda calculus]], which is taken to represent a high level description of the meaning the speaker intends. Such a "semantics" should ideally assign meanings to the smallest meaningful subparts of a sentence such that these submeanings [[compose]] to assign meanings to sentences. 

## Categorial Grammar
 
**Categorial grammar** ([Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Categorial_grammar)) is a tradition in formal syntax which draws inspiration from [[category theory]]. 

Derivation trees categorify to [[string diagrams]].

A seminal article, inspired by the structure of a (non-symmetric) [[biclosed monoidal category]] is:

* [[Lambek]], J. (1958). The mathematics of sentence structure. American mathematical monthly, 154-170. [link](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2310058)

The connection to biclosed monoidal categories is made explicit in:

* Lambek, J. (1988). Categorial and categorical grammars. In Categorial grammars and natural language structures (pp. 297-317). Springer Netherlands.

**Pregroup grammar** ([Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pregroup_grammar)) is in the same vein, and categorifies to (non-symmetric) [[compact closed categories]].

* Preller, A. (2005). Category theoretical semantics for pregroup grammars. In Logical aspects of computational linguistics (pp. 238-254). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

* Preller, A., & Lambek, J. (2007). Free compact 2-categories. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 17(2), 309-340. 

## Related Concepts
*  [[context-free grammar]]
