
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Differential geometry
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include synthetic differential geometry - contents]]
=--
#### Functional analysis
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functional analysis - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Given a linear [[differential operator]] (ordinary or partial) $P$ on a [[domain]] $M\subset\mathbb{R}^n$ or a [[manifold]] $M$, one can consider both the homogeneous equation $P f = 0$ and the nonhomogeneous equation of the form $P f = g$ where $g$ is a given nonhomogeneous term. If $g$ is a [[delta distribution]] and the boundary conditions are given, then the solution of the nonhomogenous equation

$$
P f = \delta
$$

is called the **fundamental solution** for $P$; alternative names like __Green function__ and __function of influence__ are also used. A particular solution of the nonhomogeneous equation for some other $g$ can be obtained by calculating the [[convolution]] with the fundamental solution. (Compare the fact that the delta distribution is the [[identity element]] for convolution.)

## Related concepts

* [[Feynman propagator]]

* [[Dirac propagator]]

## References

* {#Hoermander90} [[Lars Hörmander]], section 3.3 of _The analysis of linear partial differential operators_, vol. I, Springer 1983, 1990


* {#BaerGinouxPfaeffle07} [[Christian Bär]], [[Nicolas Ginoux]], [[Frank Pfäffle]], section 2 and 3 of _Wave Equations on Lorentzian Manifolds and Quantization_, ESI Lectures in Mathematics and Physics, European Mathematical Society Publishing House, ISBN 978-3-03719-037-1, March 2007, Softcover ([arXiv:0806.1036](https://arxiv.org/abs/0806.1036))


* {#Ginoux08} [[Nicolas Ginoux]], _Linear wave equations_,  Ch. 3 in [[Christian Bär]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], _Quantum Field Theory on Curved Spacetimes: Concepts and Methods_, Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 786, Springer, 2009 

* {#Khavkine14} [[Igor Khavkine]], section 2 of _Covariant phase space, constraints, gauge and the Peierls formula_, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A, 29, 1430009 (2014) ([arXiv.1402.1282](https://arxiv.org/abs/1402.1282))


* Wikipedia, _[Fundamental solution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_solution)_

* Wikipedia, _[Green's functions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green%27s_function)_

[[!redirects fundamental solutions]]

[[!redirects Green function]]
[[!redirects Green functions]]

[[!redirects Green's function]]
[[!redirects Green's functions]]


[[!redirects function of influence]]
[[!redirects functions of influence]]

[[!redirects Green operator]]
[[!redirects Green operators]]
