
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Chow groups_ of a [[scheme]] $X$ are the analogs of the [[singular chain homology]] groups of a [[topological space]].
^

## Definition

### Algebraic cycles

Let $X$ be a [[noetherian]] [[scheme]].  One defines a **$k$-dimensional [[cycle|algebraic cycle]]** as an element of the [[free group]] $Z_k(X)$ generated by the [[closed]] [[integral]] subschemes of [[dimension]] $k$, and dually a $k$-codimensional cycle is an element of the free group $Z^k(X)$ generated by the closed integral subschemes of [[codimension]] $k$ in $X$.  (An important special case is the group $Z^1(X)$ of 1-codimensional cycles, better known as the group of [[Weil divisors]].)  One usually writes a cycle as a formal sum

$$ C = \sum_{Z \subset X} n_Z.[Z] $$

### Direct image and inverse image

For [[proper morphisms]] $f : X \to Y$, one defines the direct image of a $k$-cycle by assigning

$$ f_*([Z]) = \deg_{R(f(Z))}(R(Z)) . [f(Z)] $$

when $\dim(f(Z)) = \dim(Z)$ and 0 otherwise.  Here $f(Z)$ is considered as an integral subscheme of $Y$ with the [[reduced subscheme]] structure induced from $Y$.  One gets homomorphisms $f_* : Z_k(X) \to Z_k(Y)$ for each $k$.

For [[flat morphisms]] of [[relative dimension]] $n$, one defines the inverse image of a $k$-cycle by assigning, for a closed integral subscheme $Z \subset Y$ of dimension $k$,

$$ f^*([Z]) = \sum_{Z_\alpha \subset f^{-1}(Z)} \long_{O_{X,z_\alpha}}(O_{f^{-1}(Z),z_\alpha}) [Z_\alpha] $$

where the sum is taken over the irreducible components $Z_\alpha$ of $f^{-1}(Z)$, and $z_\alpha$ are the generic points of $Z_\alpha$.  Hence one gets homomorphisms $f^* : Z_k(Y) \to Z_{k+n}(Y)$.

## Divisor associated to a rational function

A rational function $r \in R(X)$ on an integral scheme $X$ corresponds via canonical isomorphisms $R(X) \to \Frac(O_{X,x})$, for every $x \in X$, to elements $a_x/b_x \in \Frac(O_{X,x})$, and one defines the **order of vanishing** of $r$ at $x$ as

$$ \ord_x(r) = \long_{O_{X,x}}(O_{X,x}/(a_x)) - \long_{O_{X,x}}(O_{X,x}/(b_x)) $$

Then one defines the [[Weil divisor]] (1-cocycle) associated to the rational function $r$ as

$$ div(r) = \sum_{Z \subset X} \ord_z(r).[Z] $$

where the sum goes over closed integral subschemes $Z$ of codimension 1 and with generic point $z \in Z$.

### Rational equivalence

One defines a notion of [[rational equivalence]] on $X$ which, roughly speaking, identifies cycles that are connected by a family of cycles parametrized by the [[projective line]].  More precisely one says that a cycle $C \in Z_k(X)$ is rationally equivalent to zero if there are closed integral subschemes $Z_\alpha$ of dimension $k + 1$ and invertible [[rational functions]] $r_\alpha \in R(Z_\alpha)^*$ such that

$$ C = \sum_\alpha j_{\alpha,*}(div(r_\alpha)) $$

Rational equivalence generalizes [[linear equivalence]] of [[Weil divisors]].  It is an example of an [[adequate equivalence relation]].

### Chow groups

Finally one defines the **$k$-th Chow group** of X as the quotient of the group $Z_k(X)$ of $k$-cycles by the subgroup of cycles rationally equivalent to zero:

$$ CH_k(X) = Z_k(X) / \sim_{\rat} $$

The **Chow ring** is the [[graded ring]] which is the [[direct sum]] of the Chow groups, with multiplication being the [[intersection product]].

More generally one can use any [[adequate equivalence relation]] $\sim$ (e.g. $\sim_{num}, \sim_{hom}, \sim_{alg}$) in place of rational equivalence, to get groups

$$ CH^{\sim}_k(X) = Z_k(X) / \sim $$

## Cohomological interpretation

Chow groups appear as the [[cohomology group]]s of [[motivic cohomology]] (see there for details) with coefficients in suitable [[Eilenberg-MacLane object]]s.  

## Related concepts

* [[arithmetic Chow group]]
* [[adequate equivalence relation]]
* [[Chow motive]]


## References

The canonical reference is

* [[William Fulton]], _Intersection theory_, 1998.  Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics, 2, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag

The original references are

* [[Pierre Samuel]], _Rational Equivalence of Arbitrary Cycles_. American Journal of Mathematics, Vol. 78, No. 2 (Apr., 1956), pp. 383-400

* [[Claude Chevalley]], _Les classes d'equivalence rationnelles I_. Séminaire Claude Chevalley, 3 (1958), Exp. No. 2, 14 (on [NUMDAM](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=SCC_1958__3__A2_0))

* [[Claude Chevalley]], _Les classes d'équivalence rationnelle, II_. Séminaire Claude Chevalley, 3 (1958), Exp. No. 3, 18 (on [NUMDAM](http://www.numdam.org/numdam-bin/item?id=SCC_1958__3__A3_0))

The most general treatment can be found in the [[The Stacks Project]]:

* [[Aise Johan de Jong]] et. al., [[The Stacks Project]], chapter 38, _Chow Homology and Chern Classes_ ([URL](http://stacks.math.columbia.edu/chapter/38))

Informal lecture notes by [[Jacob Murre]]:

* [[Jacob Murre]], _Lectures on algebraic cycles and Chow groups_.  Summer school on Hodge theory and related topics, ICTP, 2010.  [PDF](http://jfresan.files.wordpress.com/2010/11/lectures-murre.pdf)

A concise definition of the notion of Chow group and related concepts is in 

* [this pdf](http://www.math.utah.edu/vigre/minicourses/algebra/spiroff3.pdf) from some [Vigre minicours](http://www.math.utah.edu/vigre/minicourses/) (???) 

[[!redirects Chow groups]]
[[!redirects Chow ring]]