
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Foundations
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
#### $(0,1)$-Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include (0,1)-category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Logic
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

Traditionally, as a discipline, __logic__ is the study of correct methods of reasoning.  Logicians have principally studied [[deduction]], the process of passing from premises to conclusion in such a way that the [[truth]] of the former necessitates the truth of the latter. In other words, deductive logic studies what it is for an argument to be _valid_. A second branch of logic studies [[inductive reasoning|induction]], reasoning about how to assess the plausibility of general propositions from observations of their instances. This has often been done in terms of [[probability theory]], particularly Bayesian.

Some [[philosophy|philosophers]], notably [[Charles Peirce]], considered there to be third variety of reasoning for logic to study, namely, [[abduction]]. This is a process whereby one reasons to the truth of an explanation from its ability to account for what is observed. It is therefore sometimes also known as _inference to the best explanation_. At least some aspects of this can also be studied using Bayesian probability.

Deductive logic is the best developed of the branches. For centuries, treatments of the [[syllogism]] were at the forefront of the discipline. In the nineteenth century, however, spurred largely by the needs of [[mathematics]], in particular the need to handle [[quantifiers]], a new logic emerged, known today as [[predicate logic]]. 

As we said above, logic is traditionally concerned with *correct* methods of reasoning, and philosophers (and others) have had much to say *prescriptively* about logic.  However, one can also study logic *descriptively*, taking it to be the study of methods of reasoning, without attempting to determine whether these methods are correct.

A __logic__ is a specific method of reasoning.  There are several ways to formalise this as a [[mathematics|mathematical]] object; see at _[[mathematical logic]]_ and see the survey [below](#MathematicalLogic).


## Mathematical logic
 {#MathematicalLogic}

By a convergence and unification of concepts that has been named _[[computational trinitarianism]]_, [[mathematical logic]] is equivalently incarnated in 

1. [[type theory]]

1. [[category theory]]

1. [[programming theory]]

The logical theory that is specifified by and specifies a given [[category]] $\mathcal{C}$ -- called its _[[internal logic]]_, see there for more details and also see [[internal language]], [[syntactic category]].
-- is the one 

* whose [[types]] are the [[objects]] $A$ of $\mathcal{C}$;

* whose [[contexts]] are the [[slice categories]] $\mathcal{C}_{/A}$;

* whose [[propositions]] in context are the [[(-1)-truncated objects]] $\phi$ of $\mathcal{C}_{/A}$;

* whose [[proofs]] $A \vdash PhiIsTrue : \phi $ are the [[generalized elements]] of $\phi$.

Hence pure mathematical logic in the sense of the study of [[propositions]] is identified with [[(0,1)-category theory]]: where one concentrates only on [[(-1)-truncated objects]]. Genuine [[category theory]], which is about [[0-truncated objects]], is the home for logic and [[set theory]], or rather [[type theory]], the 0-truncated objects being the [[sets]]/[[types]]/[[hSet|h-sets]]. 

For instance, 

* [[limits]] and [[colimits]], [[exponentials]], and [[object classifiers]] belong to the [[type theory]];

* while their (-1)-truncation, in this order: [[intersections]]/([[and]]), [[unions]]([[or]]), [[implications]], and [[subobject classifiers]], belong to the logic.

Generally, [[(∞,1)-category theory]], which is about untruncated objects, is the home for logic and types with a [[constructive mathematics|constructuve]] notion of [[equality]], the [[identity types]] in [[homotopy type theory]].


## Entries on logic

* [[axiom of choice]]
* [[Boolean algebra]]
* [[algebraic models for modal logics|Boolean algebra with operators]]
* [[boolean domain]]
* [[boolean function]]
* [[boolean-valued function]]
* [[classical logic]]
* [[constructive mathematics]]
* [[context]]
* [[equality]]
* [[evil]]
* [[excluded middle]]
* [[geometric logic]]
* [[Heyting algebra]]
* [[higher-order logic]]
* [[internal logic]]
* [[intuitionistic logic]]
* [[linear logic]]
* [[minimal logic]]
* [[modal logic]]

   * [[algebraic models for modal logics]]
      * [[closure algebra]]
      * [[monadic algebra]]
      * [[temporal algebra]]
   * [[arrow logic]]
   * [[epistemic logic]]
      * [[the logic K(m)]]
      * [[the logic T(m)]]
      * [[the logic S4(m)]]
      * [[the logic S5(m)]]
   * [[frame (modal logic)]]
   * [[geometric models for modal logics]]
   * [[temporal logic]]     
* [[negation]]
* [[Peirce's law]]
* [[predicate]]
* [[predicate logic]]
* [[predicative mathematics]]
* [[propositional logic]]
* [[relation]]
* [[truth value]]
* [[type]]
* [[type theory]]


## Related concepts

* [[mathematical logic]]

* [[type theory]], **logic**

* [[2-type theory]], [[2-logic]]

* [[(∞,1)-type theory]], [[(∞,1)-logic]]


## References

* [[Lambek]], J.; [[Philip Scott|Scott]], P.J. (1986), _Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic_, Cambridge University Press.
* [[Bart Jacobs]] (1999), _Categorical Logic and Type Theory_, Elsevier.
  

Historically, in some philsoophical circles 'logic' was understood in a broader sense:

* [[Hegel]], _Wissenschaft der Logik_ ( _[[Science of Logic]]_ )


[[!redirects logic]]
[[!redirects logics]]

[[!redirects categorical logic]]
[[!redirects categorial logic]]
[[!redirects category-theoretic logic]]

[[!redirects symbolic logic]]
