#Idea#

Spaces can be characterized by their [[algebra|algebras]] of functions. Using this [[duality]] between [[space and quantity]] one can define generalized spaces in terms of generalizations of their algebras of functions.

The idea of noncommutative geometry is to encode everything about the geometry of a space algebraically and then allow all commutative function algebras to be generalized to possibly non-commutative algebras. 

More generally, __noncommutative geometry__ means replacing the space by some structure carried by an entity living on that would-be space.
The entity may be for example a function, vector bundle, coherent sheaf, a complex of sheaves and KK-theory class. Objects organize into [[associative algebras]], [[operator algebras]],
[[categories]], higher categories ($k$-linear or not) and so on. [[reconstruction|Reconstruction]] theorems say that can reconstruct a genuine (say topological) "underlying" space.  Spectral theories are procedures (sometimes functors, often not) which recover some form of underlying space called [[spectrum (geometry)|spectrum]], often just partially or under strong assumptions on (the data determining) the noncommutative space.

##Very early sources and schools##

There are many sources of noncommutative spaces, e.g. the quantization in physics (in physics Snyder studied an interesting noncommutative space in late 1940s). It was often noticed since Gel'fand-Neimark's work (see [[Gelfand spectrum]]), that many geometric notions for commutative Banach algebras are interesting in noncommutative case; among early enthusiasts one could mention Irving Segal; Semadeni's monograph on Banach spaces on continuous functions also predates the sudden expansion of the field in late 1970s when [Alain Connes](http://www.alainconnes.org) brought a whole revolution in mathematics using the framework of noncommutative geometry based on operator algebras, and boosted by the discovery of cyclic (co)homology by Connes and Boris Tsygan and its connection to the [[K-theory]]. 

In [[ring theory]], there were many efforts of building [[spectrum (geometry)|spectra]] of noncommutative rings or [[abelian category|abelian categories]] (the spectrum of indecomposable injectives of Gabriel, affine spectrum of P. M. Cohn
and so on) and stronger results in special cases like P. I . rings (polynomial identities rings) by M. Artin, F. van Oystaeyen and others in 1970s. Golan and van Oystaeyen took seriously noncommutative localization in mid 1970s with very promising results; A. Rosenberg found in 1982 so-called left spectrum of a ring, straightforwardly later generalized to a spectrum of an abelian category. All these efforts belong to an early phase of [[noncommutative algebraic geometry]]. In late 1980s, the study of derived categories of (quasi)coherent sheaves complemented that effort (Kapranov, Bondal, Orlov...). Though it was rather disconnected effort (from ring-theoretic mainstream noncommutative algebraic geometry) at the beginning, it can be now more easily judged as closely related; this is also a time of birth of the influential school of noncommutative projective geometry (Artin, Smith, Zhang...). 

Quantization program and the study of [[integrable systems]] brought a number of interesting examples (in early phase by G. Kac, Sklyanin, Fadeev, Drinfel'd, Woronowicz, Jimbo, Manin, Reshetikin, Lusztig, Majid and others), with group-like flavour, the study of [[quantum groups]] which were studied in a number of formalisms from operator algebraic to algebro-geometric and purely categorical. Actions are very important in noncommutative geometry, and some of the main examples in Connes' school like group(oid) $C^*$-algebras, crossed product operator algebras and study of functions on the orbifolds and foliations. They also play an important role in [[equivariant noncommutative algebraic geometry]]; cf. the central notions like [[Hopf-Galois extension]] and entwining structure. 

Noncommutative formal geometry, concerned with objects like infinitesimal neighborhoods of subvariaties, power series in noncommutative variables and so on, has being appearing more sporadically than the operator algebraic and algebro-geometric frameworks. Among pioneering works, there are the M. Konstevich's (formal) noncommutative symplectic geometry (1992) and M. Kapranov's noncommutative geometry "based on commutator expansions". Noncommutative [[analytic geometry]] is even now only vaguely outlined in existing works. 