
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
#### Induction
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include induction - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# W-types
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A *W-type* is a [[set]] or [[type]] which is defined [[induction|inductively]] in a [[well-founded relation|well-founded]] way -- an [[inductive type]].  In most [[set theory|set theories]], W-types can be proven to exist, but in [[predicative mathematics]] or [[type theory]], where this is not the case, they are often assumed explicitly to exist.

The elements of a W-type can be considered to be "rooted well-founded trees" with a certain branching type; different W-types are distinguished by their branching signatures.  A branching signature is represented essentially by a [[family of sets]] $\{A_b\}_{b\in B}$ which can be interpreted as requiring that each *node* of the tree is labeled with an element of the set $B$, and that if a node is labeled by $b$ then it has exactly ${|A_b|}$ outgoing edges, each labeled by an element of $A_b$.  From a more computational point of view, the W-type can be viewed as a data type, where $B$ indexes the set of *constructors* and $A_b$ is the *arity* of the constructor $b$.

If the trees are not required to be well-founded, we obtain instead a [[coinduction|coinductively]] defined type, called a "co-W-type" or an [[M-type]].

## Examples

The most basic W-type is the [[natural numbers]].  Here there are two constructors:
* $0$ of arity zero, and
* $S$ of arity one.
Therefore, zero is a natural number, any natural number has a successor, and all natural numbers are generated in this way.

Similarly, if $X$ is any set, then the W-type $L X$ of lists of elements of $X$ has $|X|+1$ constructors:
* $nil$ of arity zero, and
* $cons(x,-)$ of arity one, for each $x\in X$.
Therefore, $nil$ is a list, $cons(x,\ell)$ is a list for any list $\ell$ and $x\in X$, and all lists are generated in this way.


## Definition

Actually, there are two slightly different formulations of W-types.

### W-types in categories

This version of W-types is the most natural for mathematicians used to thinking in terms of set theory or category theory.  Here we describe a W-type as the [[initial algebra|initial]] algebra for an endofunctor.  The family $\{A_b\}_{b\in B}$ can be thought of as a map $f\colon A\to B$ in some category $C$ (the fiber over $b\in B$ being $A_b$), and the endofunctor in question is the composite
$$ C \overset{A^*}{\to} C/A \overset{\Pi_f}{\to} C/B \overset{\Sigma_B}{\to} C. $$
Such a composite is called a [[polynomial endofunctor]].  Here $A^*$ is the [[pullback]] functor (a.k.a. $A\times -$), $\Pi_f$ is a [[dependent product]], and $\Sigma_B$ is a [[dependent sum]] (a.k.a. the [[forgetful functor]] from $C/B$ to $C$).  This definition makes sense in any [[locally cartesian closed category]], although the W-type (the initial algebra) may or may not exist in any given such category.

This definition is most useful when the category $C$ is not just locally cartesian closed but is a [[Π-pretopos]], since often we want to use at least coproducts in constructing $A$ and $B$.  For example, a [[natural numbers object]] is a W-type specified by one of the coproduct inclusions $1\to 1+1$, and the [[list object]] $L X$ is a W-types specified by $X\to X+1$.  More generally, endofunctors that look like [[polynomial]]s in the traditional sense:
$$ F(Y) = A_n \times Y^{\times n}  + \dots + A_1 \times Y  + A_0 $$
can be constructed as polynomial endofunctors in the above sense in any $\Pi$-pretopos.  A $\Pi$-pretopos in which all W-types exist is called a **[[ΠW-pretopos]]**.

In a [[topos]] with a [[natural numbers object]], W-types for any polynomial endofunctor can be constructed as certain sets of well-founded trees; thus every topos with a NNO is a $\Pi$-$W$-pretopos.  This applies in particular in the topos [[Set]] (unless one is a [[predicative mathematics|predicativist]], in which case $Set$ is not a topos and W-types in it must be postulated explicitly).

W-types can also be generalized to initial algebras for *dependent* polynomial functors, which are given by composites
$$ C/D \overset{p^*}{\to} C/A \overset{\Pi_f}{\to} C/B \overset{\Sigma_q}{\to} C/D $$
for some morphisms
$$ D \overset{p}{\leftarrow} A \overset{f}{\to} B \overset{q}{\to} D. $$
Note that we do not necessarily have $q f = p$, so this is not just simply a polynomial endofunctor of $C/D$ considered as a lccc in its own right.


### W-types in type theory

In [[type theory]], W-types are introduced by giving explicit constructors and destructors, a.k.a. introduction and elimination rules.  If the type theory is *extensional*, i.e. [[identity type|identities]] have unique proofs and (dependent) function types are extensional ($f=g$ if and only if $f(x)=g(x)$ for all $x$), then this is more or less equivalent to the categorical version given above.  The type theories that are the [[internal logic]] of familiar kinds of categories are all extensional in this sense.

The main distinction from the naive categorical theory above is that the map $f$ must be assumed to be a [[display map]], i.e. to exhibit $A$ as a [[dependent type]] over $B$, in order that the dependent product $\Pi_f$ be defined.  In the case of dependent polynomial functors, $q$ must also be a display map in order to define $\Sigma_q$.  (Actually, using adjointness, one can still define the W-type even if $q$ is not a display map, but its properties are not as good.  This extra generality is important, however.  For example, [[identity type]]s arise as this more general kind of W-type; see [this blog post](http://homotopytypetheory.org/2011/04/18/whats-special-about-identity-types/).)

+--{: .query}
[[Mike Shulman]]: Is the term "W-type" still used in this generality?  Or are they just called "inductive types"?
=--

Note also that in [[intensional type theory]], a W-type is only an initial algebra with respect to propositional equality, not definitional equality.  In particular, the constructors are injective only propositionally, not definitionally.  This applies already for the natural numbers.

## Related concepts

* [[M-type]]

* [[predicative topos]]

[[!include notions of type]]

## References

* [[Ieke Moerdijk]], [[Erik Palmgren]], _Wellfounded trees in categories_ ([web](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.44.6700))

*  [[Benno van den Berg]],  [[Ieke Moerdijk]] (2008-09-25); _$W$-types in sheaves_; [vdBM_Wtypes.ps/pdf](http://www.phil.cmu.edu/projects/ast/Papers/)

Discussion in relation to [[identity types]] and [[homotopy type theory]] is in

* [[Steve Awodey]], [[Nicola Gambino]], [[Kristina Sojakova]], *Inductive types in homotopy type theory* ([arXiv:1201.3898](http://arxiv.org/abs/1201.3898))
 {#AwodeyGambinoSojakova}

[[!redirects W-types]]

