
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A _Grothendieck topology_ on a category is a choice of morphisms in that category which are regarded as [[cover|covers]].

A category equipped with a Grothendieck topology is a [[site]].  Sometimes all sites are required to be [[small category|small]].

Probably the main point of having a site is so that one can define [[sheaf|sheaves]], or more generally [[stack|stacks]], on it.  In particular, the category of sheaves on a (small) site is a [[Grothendieck topos]].


## Original definition

In the original definition ([[Michael Artin]]'s seminar notes “Grothendieck topologies”), a Grothendieck topology on a [[category]] $C$ is defined as a [[set]] $T$ of [[coverings]] satisfying certain closure properties.

More precisely (to cite from Artin's notes):

\begin{definition}
A __Grothendieck topology__ on a [[category]] $C$ is
is a set $T$ of families of maps $\{\phi_i\colon U_i\to U\}_{i\in I}$
(known as __coverings__)
such that

* for any [[isomorphism]] $\phi$ we have $\{\phi\}\in T$;

* if $\{U_i\to U\}\in T$ and $\{V_{i,j}\to U_i\}\in T$ for each $i$, then $\{V_{i,j}\to U\}\in T$;

* if $\{U_i\to U\}\in T$ and $V\to U$ is a morphism, then $U_i\times_U V$ exist and $\{U_i\times_U V\to V\}\in T$.

\end{definition}


This is almost identical to the current definition of [[Grothendieck pretopology]],
except that in Artin's definition only the relevant pullbacks are required to exist.


## Definition using sieves

The following definition can be found in [[SGA]] 4, Exposé II.

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A **Grothendieck topology** $J$ on a [[category]] $C$ is an assignment to each object $c \in C$ of a collection of [[sieves]] on $c$ which are called _covering sieves_, satisfying the following axioms: 

1. (Stability under [[base change]].)
If $F$ is a [[sieve]] that covers $c$ and $g: d \to c$ is any morphism, then the pullback sieve $g^* F$ covers $d$. 

1. (Local character condition.)
If $F$ is a sieve on $c$ such that the sieve $\bigcup_d \{g: d \to c| g^* F \; covers \; d\}$ contains a covering sieve of $c$, then $F$ itself covers $c$. 

1. The [[maximal sieve]] $id: \hom(-, c) \hookrightarrow \hom(-, c)$ is always a covering sieve; 

=--

The set of covering sieves of an object $c$ is denoted $J(c)$. 

A category equipped with a Grothendieck topology is called a **[[site]]** .


+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The axiom of stability under [[base change]] guarantees that we have a functor $J: C^{op} \to Set$.  Thus $J$ itself can be regarded as an object of the [[presheaf topos]] $[C^{op},Set]$; in this way Grothendieck topologies on $C$ are identified with [[Lawvere-Tierney topologies]] on $[C^{op},Set]$.

=--

Given a Grothendieck topology $J$ on a [[small category]] $C$, one can define the category $Sh(C,J)$ of [[sheaves]] on $C$ relative to $J$, which is a [[reflective subcategory]] of the category $[C^{op},Set]$ of [[presheaves]] on $C$.  Thus we have a functor $C\to Sh(C,J)$ given by the composite of the [[Yoneda embedding]] with the reflection (or "sheafification").  This composite functor is [[full and faithful functor|fully faithful]] if and only if all representable presheaves are sheaves for $J$; a topology with this property is called [[subcanonical site|subcanonical]].

## Saturation {#Saturation}

Grothendieck topologies may be and in practice quite often are obtained as closures of collections of morphisms that are not yet closed under the operations above (that are not yet sieves, not yet pullback stable, etc.).

Two notions of such unsaturated collections of morphisms inducing Grothendieck topologies are

*  [[Grothendieck pretopology]],

*  [[coverage]].

## Examples {#Examples}

### Topology on open subsets of a topological space

The archetypical example of a Grothendieck topology is that on a [[category of open subsets]] $Op(X)$ of a [[topological space]] $X$. A covering family of an open subset $U \subset X$ is a collection of open subsets $V_i \subset U$ that cover $U$ in the ordinary sense of the word, i.e. which are such that every point $x \in U$ is in at least one of the $V_i$.



### Regular topology

Any [[regular category]] $C$ admits a [[subcanonical site|subcanonical]] Grothendieck topology whose covering families are generated by single [[regular epimorphisms]].  If $C$ is [[exact category|exact]] or has pullback-stable [[reflexive coequalizer]]s, then its [[codomain fibration]] is a [[stack]] for this topology (the necessary and sufficient condition is that any pullback of a kernel pair is again a kernel pair).

### Extensive topology

Any [[extensive category]] admits a [[Grothendieck topology]] whose [[cover|covering families]] are (generated by) the families of inclusions into a [[coproduct]] (finite or small, as appropriate).  We call this the **extensive [[coverage]]** or **extensive topology**.  The [[codomain fibration]] of any extensive category is a [[stack]] for its extensive topology.


### Coherent topology

Any [[coherent category]] $C$ admits a [[subcanonical site|subcanonical]] Grothendieck topology in which the covering families are generated by finite, jointly [[regular epimorphism|regular-epimorphic]] families.  Equivalently, they are generated by single [[regular epimorphisms]] and by finite unions of [[subobject]]s.  If $C$ is [[extensive category|extensive]], then its coherent topology is generated by the regular topology together with the extensive topology.  (In fact, the coherent topology is [[superextensive site|superextensive]].)


### Canonical topology

On any category there is a largest subcanonical topology.  This is called the *[[canonical topology]]*, with "subcanonical" a back-formation from this (since a topology is subcanonical iff it is contained in the canonical topology).  On a [[Grothendieck topos]], the covering families in the canonical topology are those which are jointly epimorphic.


## Historical note on terminology

The term "topology" for this concept is hallowed by tradition and the name of Grothendieck, but some people consider it to be somewhat unfortunate. While "a category equipped with a (Grothendieck) topology" is, in fact, sort of a generalization of "a set equipped with an (ordinary) topology," the relationship between a category and its topology is quite different from the relationship between a set and its topology.  In particular, when we construct a site from a topological space, the objects of the category are the _open sets_, not the points, of the space.

This use of "topology" can also lead to confusion since for a topologist, there is a completely different and very natural meaning of "topology on a category:" namely, topologies on its sets of objects and morphisms making it into an [[internal category]] in [[Top]].  The topologist's definition is, of course, a conservative extension of the classical notions of "topology on a set" and even "topology on a group," while there are no nontrivial Grothendieck topologies on a group considered as a 1-object category.

Furthermore, the use of "topology" for a category with a system of covers also leads to the use of "continuous" for a functor which preserves covers.  This is (in some people's opinion) doubly unfortunate, since "continuous functor" is used not only by topologists to mean an internal or [[enriched category|enriched]] functor over Top, but also by many category-theorists to mean a functor that preserves all small [[limit|limits]].  This is especially confusing since covers are more akin to colimits than limits. Moreover, while a continuous function between topological spaces does induce a a cover-preserving functor between categories of open sets, the function and the functor go in opposite directions.

In [[Elephant|Sketches of an Elephant]], Peter Johnstone introduced the term __coverage__ used above for a system of covers on a category, with "Grothendieck coverage" as a proposed replacement for "Grothendieck topology."  See [[coverage]] for his definitions.  Proposed replacements for "Lawvere-Tierney topology" include:

* _Local operator_ (used by Johnstone).

* _Local modality_ or _geometric modality_, since in the [[internal logic]] of the topos, it represents a [[modal operator]] with the intutive meaning of "it is locally the case that...".

* _Lawvere-Tierney operator_ or _Lawvere-Tierney modality_ to avoid possible conflict with other uses of "local" or "geometric" in modal logic.


## Related notions 

A more general notion is simply a collection of "covering families," not necessarily sieves, satisfying only pullback-stability; this suffices to define an equivalent notion of sheaf.  Following the [[Elephant]], we call such a system a [[coverage]].  A Grothendieck topology may then be defined as a coverage that consists of sieves (which the Elephant calls "sifted") and satisfies certain extra saturation conditions; see [[coverage]] for details.

An intermediate notion is that of a [[Grothendieck pretopology]], which consists of covering families that satisfy some, but not all, of the closure conditions for a Grothendieck topology.  Many examples are "naturally" pretopologies, but must be "saturated" under the remaining closure conditions to produce Grothendieck topologies.

As remarked above, Grothendieck topologies on a small category $C$ are also in bijective correspondence with [[Lawvere-Tierney topology|Lawvere-Tierney topologies]] on the [[presheaf]] [[topos]] $[C^{op},Set]$.  See [[Lawvere-Tierney topology]] for a description of the correspondence.

See also 

* [[coverage]], [[site]], [[Lawvere-Tierney topology]], [[Grothendieck pretopology]], [[Q-category]], [[cd-structure]]

* [[Weiss topology]]

* [[(∞,1)-Grothendieck topology]]


## References

The original definition is in

* [[Michael Artin]], _Grothendieck Topologies.  Notes on a Seminar by M. Artin.  Spring, 1962_, Harvard University, Department of Mathematics.  [PDF](http://www.math.nagoya-u.ac.jp/~larsh/teaching/S2013_AG/grothendiecktopologies.pdf)

The definition in terms of [[sieves]] is found in

* [[SGA]] 4: Théorie des topos et cohomologie étale des schémas.

Standard books include

* [[Saunders MacLane]], [[Ieke Moerdijk]], _[[Sheaves in Geometry and Logic]]_

* [[Francis Borceux]], _[[Handbook of Categorical Algebra]]_, Volume 3.

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _[[Sketches of an Elephant]]_

[[!redirects Grothendieck topologies]]