
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

A __bicartesian closed category__ is a [[cartesian closed category]] with finite [[coproducts]]. In the case where this is furthermore a [[preorder]] or [[poset]], it is called a [[Heyting prealgebra]] or [[Heyting algebra]], respectively. They provide the semantics and proof theory of [[intuitionistic logic|intuitionistic]] [[propositional logic]].


Note that a bicartesian closed category is [[bicartesian category|bicartesian]] (that is, it is both [[cartesian monoidal category|cartesian]] and [[cocartesian monoidal category|cocartesian]]), and furthermore it is cartesian closed, but it is usually *not* [[cocartesian closed category|cocartesian closed]] (as the only such category is the trivial terminal category), nor co-(cartesian closed) (i.e., the dual of a cartesian closed category; aka, cocartesian coclosed). Thus the terminology could be confusing, but since the only categories which are both cartesian closed and co-(cartesian closed) are preorders, there is not much danger.

Also note that a bicartesian closed category is automatically a [[distributive category]]. This follows since the functors $X\mapsto A\times X$ have right adjoints (by closedness), so they preserve colimits. 

A bicartesian closed category is one kind of [[2-rig]].

+-- {: .query}
Question: don't you need *distributive* bicartesian closed categories to interpret intuitionistic propositional logic? Consider the or-elimination rule 

$$
\frac{\Gamma, A \vdash C \qquad \Gamma,B \vdash C}
     {\Gamma, A + B \vdash C}
$$

The intepretations of the two premises will be maps of type $\Gamma \times A \to C$ and $\Gamma \times B \to C$. Then the universal property of coproducts gets us to $(\Gamma \times A) + (\Gamma \times B) \to C$, but we can't get any farther -- we need a distributivity law to get $\Gamma \times (A+B) \to C$.

Answer: Does the above answer your question?

Yes, it does. Thanks a lot!
=--