
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[type theory]], a **display map** is a [[morphism]] $p\colon B\to A$ in a [[category]] which represents a [[dependent type]] under some [[categorical semantics]] of type theory valued in that category.  

That is, $B$ represents a [[type]] dependent on a [[variable]] of type $A$, usually written syntactically as $x:A \vdash B(x):Type$.  The intended intuition is that $B(x)$ is the [[fiber]] of the map $p$ over $x\in A$.

More specifically, the [[syntactic category]] of a type theory is naturally equipped with a class of maps called "display maps" which come from its type dependencies, while [[models]] for such a [[theory]] can be studied in any other category equipped with a suitable class of maps called "display maps."  By the [usual](type%20theory#CategoricalSemantics) [[adjunction]], such models are then equivalent to functors out of the syntactic category which preserve the relevant structure, including the display maps.

Since the most common dependent type theories include [[dependent product]] types, and any display map in a category that represents semantics for such a theory must be [[exponentiable morphism|exponentiable]], the term **display map** is sometimes used to mean any exponentiable morphism.

Sometimes all maps are display maps.  This happens particularly in 
[[extensional type theory]], such as versions of the [[internal logic]] of categories that include dependent types.

In the context of _[[homotopy type theory]]_ display maps are [[fibrations]], for instance in a [[type-theoretic model category]].

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn #CategoryWithDisplays}
###### Definition

For $\mathcal{C}$ a [[category]], a [[class]] $D \subset Mor(\mathcal{C})$ of [[morphisms]] of $\mathcal{C}$ is called a **class of displays** if 

1. All [[pullbacks]] of elements of $D$ exists.

1. The composition of an element in $D$ with an [[isomorphism]] gives another element in $D$.


An **interpetation** or [[model]] of a category with class of displays $(\mathcal{C}, D)$ is another category with displays $(\mathcal{C}', D')$ and a  [[functor]]

$$
  S : \mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{C}'
$$

which preserves display maps and their pullbacks.

=--

This appears as ([Taylor, def. 8.3.2](#Taylor)).


## Examples

+-- {: .num_example}
###### Examples

Examples of categories with displays, def. \ref{CategoryWithDisplays}, include

1. A category $\mathcal{C}$ a catgory with finite [[products]] and $D$ the class of call product [[projections]] $X \times A \to X$.

1. A topos $\mathcal{C}$ equipped with its class of [[monomorphisms]].

1. (...) 

=--

([Taylor, example 8.3.6](#Taylor))

## References

Section 8.3 in 

* [[Paul Taylor]], _[[Practical Foundations of Mathematics]]_
 {#Taylor}

[[!redirects display map]]
[[!redirects display maps]]
[[!redirects display morphism]]
[[!redirects display morphisms]]
