
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Higher category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include higher category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

A $Gray$-category (or Gray category) is a certain type of [[semi-strict infinity-category|semi-strict]] [[3-category]], in which composition is strictly associative and unital, but the [[interchange law]] holds only up to isomorphism.


## Definition

A **$Gray$-category** is a category [[enriched category|enriched]] over the [[symmetric monoidal category]] $Gray$, which is the category of [[strict 2-category|2-categories]] and [[strict 2-functors]] with the [[Gray tensor product]].


## Properties

### Coherence theorem

Gordon, Power, and Street proved that every [[tricategory]] (that is, weak 3-category) is equivalent to a $Gray$-category.  Not every tricategory is equivalent to a fully [[strict 3-category]]; any doubly-degenerate [[braided monoidal category]] which is not [[symmetric monoidal category|symmetric]] is an example.  So this is "the best one can do" in one sense, although there are other incomparable paths one can take, such as [[Simpson's conjecture|weakening units]] but keeping interchange strict.

The inclusion of $Gray$-categories into tricategories is not uniquely determined -- there is a left and right-hand version (from a remark in Example 9.3.9 of Leinster's book cited below).  However, the two possible ways are canonically equivalent as tricategories.

### Canonical model structure

Gray-categories support a [[canonical model structure]] ([Lack](#Lack))



## $Gray$-groupoids

A $Gray$-category that is a [[3-groupoid]] is a [[Gray-groupoid]].


## Examples

* The prototypical Gray-category is [[Gray]], which consists of [[strict 2-categories]], strict 2-functors, pseudonatural transformations, and modifications.

* A Gray-category with one object is called a Gray-monoid, and is a semi-strict version of a [[monoidal bicategory]].

* A doubly-degenerate Gray-category is the same as a category with two [[monoidal category|monoidal structures]] satisfying an [[exchange law]].  This is essentially the same as a [[braided monoidal category]].

* Since any tricategory is equivalent to a Gray-category, one can obtain examples of Gray-categories in this way.  For example, the tricategory [[Bicat]] of bicategories, pseudofunctors, pseudonatural transformations, and modifications is equivalent to some Gray-category.

  It is important to note that Bicat is *not* equivalent to Gray, due to the absence of pseudofunctors in the latter.  It is equivalent to the sub-Gray-category of Gray determined by the "flexible" or "cofibrant" 2-categories, however, since between such 2-categories any pseudofunctor is equivalent to a strict one.

* Since pseudofunctors between strict 2-categories compose strictly associatively, and between any 2-categories $A$ and $B$ there is a strict 2-category $Ps(A,B)$ of pseudofunctors, pseudonatural transformations, and modifications, one might hope that there is a Gray-category consisting of strict 2-categories, *pseudofunctors*, pseudonatural transformations, and modifications, despite the fact that the prototypical example $Gray$ contains only strict 2-functors.  However, this is false, because in a Gray-category the [[whiskering]] of 2-cells by a 1-cell is strictly functorial relative to composition of 2-cells along 1-cells, but this fails for whiskering of pseudonaturals by a pseudofunctor.

## Related pages

* [[intercategory]]

## References

* Gordon, Power, [[Ross Street|Street]], _Coherence for tricategories_, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 117 (1995), no. 558, vi+81 pp.

* [[Nick Gurski]], _Algebraic tricategories_, Ph. D. Thesis.

* [[Tom Leinster]], _Higher operads, higher categories_

* [[Steve Lack]], _A Quillen model structure for Gray-categories_ ([arxiv:1001.2366](http://arxiv.org/abs/1001.2366))
 {#LAck}


[[!redirects Gray category]]
[[!redirects Gray-categories]]
[[!redirects Gray categories]]
