pages/368.md, before:

A [[functor]] is called **bijective on objects**, or **bo**, if it is, well, bijective on objects.  One reason bo functors are important is because together with [[full functor|full and faithful (ff) functors]] they form an [[weak factorization system|orthogonal factorization system]] on [[Cat]]; see [[bo-ff factorization system]].  This factorization system can also be constructed using a [[generalized kernel]].

To be less [[evil]], one could require that the functor be bijective on objects only up to isomorphism; that is, it is [[essentially surjective functor|essentially surjective]] and [[full functor|full]] on isomorphisms.  However, from the point of view of [[factorization system]]s, the non-evil version of a bo functor is nothing more or less than an [[essentially surjective functor]], since essentially surjective functors and ff functors form a bicategorical factorization system on the [[bicategory]] $Cat$.

[[R. Street]] in _[Categorical and combinatorial aspects of descent theory](http://arxiv.org/pdf/math/0303175)_ proves

Proposition. A functor is bijective on objects if and only if it exhibits its
codomain as the (2-categorical) [[descent object|codescent object]] of some simplicial category.

This can be generalized to any [[regular 2-category]].

[[!redirects bo functors]]
[[!redirects b.o. functor]]
[[!redirects b.o. functors]]
[[!redirects bijective on objects functor]]
[[!redirects bijective on objects functors]]
[[!redirects bijective-on-objects functor]]
[[!redirects bijective-on-objects functors]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 107487 Revision date: 2016-04-13 13:03:46 Page name: bo functor Author: Mike Shulman IP address: 192.195.154.58

pages/368.md, after:

## Bijective-on-objects functors

A [[functor]] is called **bijective on objects**, or **bo**, if it is, well, bijective on objects.  One reason bo functors are important is because together with [[full functor|full and faithful (ff) functors]] they form an [[weak factorization system|orthogonal factorization system]] on [[Cat]]; see [[bo-ff factorization system]].  This factorization system can also be constructed using a [[generalized kernel]].

To be less [[evil]], one could require that the functor be bijective on objects only up to isomorphism; that is, it is [[essentially surjective functor|essentially surjective]] and [[full functor|full]] on isomorphisms.  However, from the point of view of [[factorization system]]s, the non-evil version of a bo functor is nothing more or less than an [[essentially surjective functor]], since essentially surjective functors and ff functors form a bicategorical factorization system on the [[bicategory]] $Cat$.

[[R. Street]] in _[Categorical and combinatorial aspects of descent theory](http://arxiv.org/pdf/math/0303175)_ proves

Proposition. A functor is bijective on objects if and only if it exhibits its
codomain as the (2-categorical) [[descent object|codescent object]] of some simplicial category.

This can be generalized to any [[regular 2-category]].

## Related pages

* [[surjective on objects functor]]
* [[essentially surjective functor]]

[[!redirects bo functors]]
[[!redirects b.o. functor]]
[[!redirects b.o. functors]]
[[!redirects bijective on objects functor]]
[[!redirects bijective on objects functors]]
[[!redirects bijective-on-objects functor]]
[[!redirects bijective-on-objects functors]]
