
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Overview

To some extent, [[quantum mechanics]] and [[quantum field theory]] are a [[deformation theory|deformation]] of [[classical mechanics]] and [[classical field theory]], with the deformation parameterized by [[Planck's constant]] $\hbar$. The _semiclassical approximation_ or _quasiclassical approximation_ to quantum mechanics is the restriction of this deformation to just first order (or some finite order) in $\hbar$.

[[!include lassical-to-quantum notions - table]]

Applied to [[path integral]] [[quantization]], the semiclassical approximation is meant to approximate the [[path integral]] 
$\int_{\phi \in \mathbf{Fields}} D\phi\; F(\phi) e^{iS(\phi)/\hbar}$ by an expansion in $\hbar$ about the [[critical points]] of the [[action functional]] $S$ (hence the solutions of the [[Euler-Lagrange equations]], hence to the classical trajectories of the system). As usual for the [[path integral]] in [[physics]], this often requires work to make precise, but at a heuristic level the idea is famous as the _[[rotating phase approximation]]_: the idea is that in regions of [[field (physics)|field]]-space where $S$ varies fast as measured in units of [[Planck's constant]], the [[complex number|complex phases]] of the integrand $\exp(i S / \hbar )$ tend to cancel each other in the integral so that substantial contributions to the integral come only from the vicininity of critical points of $S$ (classical [[trajectories]]).

But semiclassical approximations can be applied to most other formulations of [[quantum physics]], where they often lead to precise and powerful mathematical tools.

Notably in the [[Schrödinger picture]] of quantum evolution, solutions to the [[Schrödinger equation]] $i \hbar \frac{d}{d t} \psi = \hat H \psi$ (which characterizes [[quantum states]] given by [[wave functions]] $\psi$ for [[Hamiltonian mechanics|Hamiltonian dynamics]] induced by a [[Hamilton operator]] $\hat H$) are usefully considered to first (or any finite) order in $\hbar$.
This method, known after (some of) its inventors as the **[[WKB method]]** or similar, amounts to expressing the [[wave function]] in the form $\psi = exp(S)$ where $S$ is a slowly varying function and solving the equation for $S$. 
Globally consistent such solutions to first order lead to what are called [[Bohr-Sommerfeld leaf|Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization conditions]]. 
For the formalization of this method in [[symplectic geometry]]/[[geometric quantization]] see at _[[semiclassical state]]_.

This [[WKB method]] makes sense for a more general class of 
[[wave equations]]. For instance in [[wave mechanics|wave]] [[optics]] this yields the short-[[wavelength]] limit of the [[geometrical optics]] approximation. Here $S$ is called the **[[eikonal]]**. 

Multidimensional generalization of the [[WKB method]] appear to be rather nontrivial; they have been pioneered by V. Maslov who introduced a topological invariant to remove ambiguities of the naive version of the method, called the _[[Maslov index]]_.

## Related phenomena

### Equivariant localization

In some special cases (most often in the presence of supersymmetry) the main contribution (the first term in expansion) amounts to the true result; the quantum correction sometimes leads however to an overall scalar factor. This is the case of so-called localization (related directly in some cases to the equivariant localization in cohomology and Lefshetz-type fixed point formulas). Most of well known examples of integrable systems and TQFTs lead to localization. 

### Large $N$-limit in gauge theories

The [[large N limit]] of gauge theories, which is of importance in [[collective field theory]] and in the study of relation between gauge and string theories is formally very similar to semiclassical expansion, where the role of Planck constant is played by $1/N^2$. 

### In radiation theory

In the theory of radiation there is a different meaning of semiclassical treatment: one considers particles in a sorrounding electromagnetic field and the particles are treated as in finite-dimensional quantum mechanics, with the electromagnetic field as an external classical field coupled to the particles via an interaction term. 

## Literature

* M.V. Fedoryuk, _Semi-classical approximation_, Springer [Online](http://eom.springer.de/S/s083990.htm) Enc. of Math.

* Sean Bates, Alan Weinstein, _Lectures on the geometry of quantization_, [pdf](http://www.math.berkeley.edu/~alanw/GofQ.pdf)

* V. P. Maslov, _Stationary-phase method for Feynman's continual integral_, Theoret. and Math. Phys., 2:1 (1970), 21–25; Russian original: ТМФ, 2:1 (1970), 30–35 [pdf](http://www.mathnet.ru/php/getFT.phtml?jrnid=tmf&paperid=3986&what=fullt&option_lang=rus).

* V. P. Maslov, _Theory of perturbations and asymptotic methods_ (Russian), Izdat. Moskov. Gos. Univ. 1965.

* V. I. Arnol'd, _Characteristic class entering in quantization conditions_, Funct. Anal. its Appl. 1967, 1:1, 1–13, [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01075861) (В. И. Арнольд, “О характеристическом классе, входящем в условия квантования”, Функц. анализ и его прил., 1:1 (1967), 1–14, [pdf](http://www.mathnet.ru/php/getFT.phtml?jrnid=faa&paperid=2802&what=fullt&option_lang=rus)) 

* V. Guillemin, S. Sternberg, _Geometric asymptotics_, AMS 1977, [online](http://www.ams.org/online_bks/surv14)

* A. S. Mishchenko, B. Yu. Sternin, V. E. Shatalov, _Lagrangian manifolds
and the canonical operator method_, Nauka, Moscow, 1978. 
(in Russian). English transl.: _Lagrangian manifolds and the Maslov operator_, Springer, Berlin, 1990.

* Richard J. Szabo, _Equivariant cohomology and localization of path integrals_, Lecture Notes in Physics, N.S. Monographs __63__. Springer  2000. xii+315 pp. (early version: _Equivariant localization of path integrals_, [hep-th/9608068](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9608068))

* M. F. Atiyah, _Circular symmetry and stationary phase approximation_, Asterisque __131__ (1985) 43--59

* N. Berline, [[Ezra Getzler]], M. Vergne, _Heat kernels and Dirac operators_, Grundlehren __298__, Springer 1992, "Text Edition" 2003. 

* Albert Schwarz, Oleg Zaboronsky, _Supersymmetry and localization_, Comm. Math. Phys. __183__, 2 (1997), 463-476, [euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1158328185)

* [[Albert Schwarz]], _Semiclassical approximation in [[Batalin-Vilkovisky quantization|Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism]]_, Comm. Math. Phys.  __158__ (1993), no. 2, 373--396, [euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104254246). 

For large N-limit compared to semiclassical expansion see

*  L. G. Yaffe, _Large N limits as classical mechanics_, Rev. Mod. Phys. __54__, 407–435 (1982), [pdf](http://rmp.aps.org/pdf/RMP/v54/i2/p407_1)

For the semiclassical method in [[superstring theory]] see 

* J. Maldacena, G. Moore, N. Seiberg, D. Shih, _Exact vs. semiclassical target space of the minimal string_, [hep-th/0408039](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0408039)

* K. Hori, A. Iqbal, C. Vafa, _D-Branes and mirror symmetry_, [hep-th/0005247](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0005247) 


[[!redirects quasiclassical approximation]]
[[!redirects quasi-classical approximation]]
[[!redirects semiclassical expansion]]
