
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

While usual [[quantization]] has to give a [[Hilbert space]] and self-adjoint operators acting on it as [[observable]]s, and [Planck constant](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck_constant) $h$ has a definite value, the **deformation quantization** is concerned with more moderate aim of forming just a formal power series  depending on a formal variable, replacing the Planck constant. As any other quantization, the deformation quantization has as an input a description of a classical system, which is in this case most often a smooth [[Poisson manifold]]. The deformation quantization replaces the algebra of smooth functions on the Poisson manifold with the same vector space, but equipped with new noncommutative associative unital product which, up to order $h$, agrees with the underlying Poisson bracket. Of course the proper study of quantization of Poisson manifolds studied the appropriate notion at the level of sheaves of algebras. Gluing local solutions to the quantization problem involves [[stacks]] and [[gerbes]].  

[[Vladimir Drinfel'd]] has sketched a proof (and gave main ingredients) to show that every [[Poisson Lie group]] can be deformation quantized to a [[Hopf algebra]]; this proof has been completed by Etingof and Kazhdan. [[Maxim Kontsevich]] proved a certain *[[Kontsevich formality|formality theorem]]* (formality is here in the sense of [[rational homotopy theory]]) whose main corollary (and motivation) was the statement that every Poisson manifold has a deformation quantization. 

## Related concepts

* [[reductions deformations resolutions in physics]]

* [[quantization]]

  * **deformation quantization**

  * [[geometric quantization]]

  * [[path integral]]

  * [[semiclassical approximation]]



## References

The result that every Poisson manifold admits a deformation quantization is due to 

* [[Maxim Kontsevich]], _Deformation quantization of Poisson manifolds_,  Lett. Math. Phys. __66__ (2003),  no. 3, 157--216, ([q-alg/9709040](http://arxiv.org/abs/q-alg/9709040)).

Deformation quantization in [[quantum field theory]] in the context of [[AQFT]] is disucssed in

* [[Michael Dütsch]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], _Perturbative algebraic quantum field theory and deformation quantization_
Proceedings of the Conference on Mathematical Physics in Mathematics and Physics, Siena June 20-25 (2000) ([arXiv:hep-th/0101079](http://xxx.uni-augsburg.de/abs/hep-th/0101079)) 


See also

* [wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weyl_quantization#Deformation_quantization)
