
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Many fields of [[mathematics]] have their own versions of _zeta functions_: [[arithmetic geometry]] and [[algebraic geometry]], [[dynamical systems]], [[graphs]], [[operator algebra]]. So this entry will take a lot of time to write. The most well-known example is of course the _[[Riemann zeta function]]_.

There are several articles trying to attach zeta functions attached to [[triangulated categories]] (and [[stable model categories]]...) and study them. Zeta functions express some [[motive|motivic]] information, hence the categorical framework must be natural as it is for [[motives]]. 

## Related concepts

* [[multiple zeta values]], [[motivic multiple zeta values]], [[motivic integration]], [[motive]]

* [[Weil conjecture]]

* [[Riemann hypothesis]]

* there are attempts to understand the Riemann zeta function as the spectrum of a [[Hamiltonian]] of a [[quantum mechanical system]]. See at _[[Riemann hypothesis and physics]]_.

* [[Beilinson regulator]]

## References

### General

A general review is in 

* [[Alain Connes]], [[Matilde Marcolli]], chapter II of _[[Noncommutative Geometry, Quantum Fields and Motives]]_



### In algebraic geometry

* [[Yuri Manin]], _Lectures on zeta functions and motives (according to Deninger and Kurokawa)_, Astérisque __228__:4 (1995) 121--163, and preprint MPIM1992-50 [pdf](http://www.mpim-bonn.mpg.de/preblob/4793)

* Nobushige Kurokawa, _Zeta functions over $F_1$_,  Proc. Japan Acad. Ser. A Math. Sci. __81__:10 (2005) 180-184 [euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.pja/1135791771)

### Categorical approaches

* [[Michael Larsen|M. Larsen]], [[Valery Lunts|V. A. Lunts]], _Motivic measures and stable birational geometry_, Mosc. Math. J. __3__, 1 (2003) 85--95; _Rationality criteria for motivic zeta functions_, Compos. Math. __140__:6 (2004) 1537–1560
* [[Vladimir Guletskii]], _Zeta functions in triangulated categories_, Mathematical Notes __87__, 3 (2010) 369--381, [math/0605040](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0605040) 
* [[Maxim Kontsevich|M. Kontsevich]], _Notes on motives in finite characteristics_, [math.AG/0702206](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.AG/0702206) 

* [[John Baez]], _[[johnbaez:Zeta functions]]_

[[!redirects zeta functions]]
[[!redirects Riemann zeta function]]

[[!redirects Dedekind zeta function]]
[[!redirects Dedekind zeta functions]]

[[!redirects Dedekind zeta-function]]
[[!redirects Dedekind zeta-functions]]

