pages/384.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#CW complexes
* table of contents
{: toc}


## Idea

A **CW-complex** is a [[nice topological space]] which is or can be built up inductively, by a process of attaching [[n-disks]] $D^n$ along their [[boundary]] [[n-spheres|(n-1)-spehres]] $S^{n-1}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$: a [[cell complex]] built from the basic topological cells $S^{n-1} \hookrightarrow D^n$. 

Being, therefore,  essentially combinatorial objects, CW complexes are the principal objects of interest in [[algebraic topology]]; in fact, most spaces of interest to algebraic topologists are [[homotopy equivalence|homotopy equivalent]] to CW-complexes. Notably the [[geometric realization]] of every [[simplicial set]], hence also of every [[groupoid]], [[2-groupoid]], etc., is a CW complex. 

Also, CW complexes are the [[cofibrant objects]] in the [[classical model structure on topological spaces]]. 
This means in particular that _every_  topological space is _[[weak homotopy equivalence|weakly homotopy equivalent]]_ to a CW-complex (but need not be [[homotopy equivalence|strongly homotopy equivalent]] to one). See also at _[[CW-approximation]]_.  Since every topological space is a [[fibrant object]] in this [[model category]] structure, this means that the [[full subcategory]] of [[Top]] on the CW-complexes is a category of "homotopically very good representatives" of [[homotopy types]]. See at _[[homotopy theory]]_ and _[[homotopy hypothesis]]_ for more on this.

## Terminology
 {#Terminology}

The terminology "CW-complex" goes back to [[John Henry Constantine Whitehead]] (see [Hatcher, "Topology of cell complexes", p. 520](#HatcherTopologyOfCellComplexes)). It stands for the following two properties shared by any CW complex:

* **C** = "closure finiteness": a [[compact subset]] of a CW complex intersects the [[interior]] of only finitely many cells ([prop.](classical+model+structure+on+topological+spaces#CompactSubsetsAreSmallInCellComplexes)), hence in particular so does the closure of any cell.


* **W** = "weak topology": Since a CW-complex is a [[colimit]] in [[Top]] over its cells, and as such equipped with the [[final topology]] of the cell inclusion maps, a subset of a CW-complex is open or closed precisely if its restriction to (the closure of) each cell is open or closed, respectively.

(Whitehead called the [[interior]] of the [[n-disks]] the "cells", so that their closure of each cell is the corresponding $n$-disk.)


## Definition

A CW-complex is a topological space $X$ equipped with a sequence of spaces and continuous maps

\[\label{CW1}\varnothing = X_{-1} \hookrightarrow X_0 \hookrightarrow X_1 \hookrightarrow \ldots \hookrightarrow X_n \hookrightarrow \ldots
\]

and a [[cocone]] making $X$ into its [[colimit]] (in [[Top]], or else in the category of [[compactly generated space]]s or one of many other [[nice category of spaces|nice categories of spaces]]) where each space $X_n$ (called the $n$-skeleton of $X$) is the result of attaching copies of the $n$-disk $D^n = \{x \in \mathbb{R}^n: ||x|| \leq 1\}$ along their boundaries $S^{n-1} = \partial D^n$ to $X_{n-1}$. Specifically, $X_{-1}$ is the empty space, and each $X_n$ is a pushout in [[Top]] of a diagram of the form 

$$X_{n-1} \stackrel{(f_i)}{\leftarrow} \coprod_{i \in I} S_{i}^{n-1} \stackrel{\coprod_i j_i}{\to} \coprod_{i \in I} D_{i}^n$$ 

where $I$ is some index set, each $j_i: S_{i}^{n-1} \to D_{i}^n$ is the boundary inclusion of a copy of $D^n$, and 
$f_i: S_{i}^{n-1} \to X_{n-1}$ is a continuous map, often called an _attaching map_. The coprojections $X_{n-1} \to X_n$ of these pushouts give the arrows on which diagram (eq:CW1) is based. 

A relative CW-complex $(X, A)$ is defined as above, except $X_{-1} = A$ is allowed to be any space.

A _[[finite CW-complex]]_ is one which admits a presentation in which there are only finitely many attaching maps, and similarly a _countable CW-complex_ is one which admits a presentation with countably many attaching maps. 

Formally this means that (relative) CW-complexes are special (relative) [[cell complexes]] with respect to the [[cofibrantly generated model category|generating cofibrations]] in the standard [[Quillen model structure on topological spaces]]: they are those cell complexes which are obtained from a _countable_ [[transfinite composition]] of cell attachments, and where in addition the stage $X_n$ is obtained from $X_{n-1}$ by attaching cells of dimension $n$, instead of cells of arbitrary dimension.

Milnor has argued that the category of spaces which are homotopy equivalent to CW-complexes, also called [[m-cofibrant spaces]], is a [[nice category of spaces|convenient category of spaces]] for [[algebraic topology]].


## Properties

### Local contractibility
 {#LocalContractibility}

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

A CW-complex is a [[locally contractible topological space]].

=--

For instance ([Hatcher, prop. A.4](#Hatcher)). 

### Compactness properties

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

Every CW-complex is a [[paracompact topological space]].

=--

See for instance ([Hatcher K-theory, appendix of section 1.2](#HatcherK)). For a discussion that highlights which [[axiom of choice|choice principles]] are involved, see ([Fritsch-Piccinini 90, Theorem 1.3.5 (p. 29 and following)](#FP)).

+-- {: .num_prop #CWComplexIsCompactlyGenerated}
###### Proposition

Every CW-complex is a [[compactly generated topological space]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Since a CW-complex $X$ is a [[colimit]] in [[Top]] over attachments of standard [[n-disks]] $D^{n_i}$ (its cells), by the characterization of colimits in $Top$ ([prop.](Top#DescriptionOfLimitsAndColimitsInTop)) a subset of $X$ is open or closed precisely if its restriction to each cell is open or closed, respectively. Since the $n$-disks are compact, this implies one direction: if a subset $A$ of $X$ intersected with all compact subsets is closed, then $A$ is closed. 

For the converse direction, since [[a CW-complex is a Hausdorff space]] and since [[compact subspaces of Hausdorff spaces are closed]], the intersection of a closed subset with a compact subset is closed.

=--


### Up to homotopy equivalence 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 

Every CW complex is homotopy equivalent to (the [realization](simplicial+complex#geometric_realisations_and_polyhedra) of) a [[simplicial complex]]. 

=-- 

See [Gray](#Gray), Corollary 16.44 (p. 149) and Corollary 21.15 (p. 206).  For more see at _[[CW approximation]]_.

+-- {: .num_cor} 
###### Corollary 
Every CW complex is homotopy equivalent to a space that admits a [[good open cover]]. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 

If $Y$ has the [[homotopy type]] of a CW complex and $X$ is a [[finite CW complex]], then the [[mapping space]] $Y^X$ with the [[compact-open topology]] has the homotopy type of a CW complex. 

=-- 

([Milnor 59](#Milnor59)) 

### Subcomplexes
 {#Subcomplexes}

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

For $X$ a CW complex, the inclusion $X' \hookrightarrow X$ of any subcomplex has an [[open neighbourhood]] in $X$ which is a [[deformation retract]] of $X'$. In particular such an inclusion is a _[good pair](relative+homology#GoodPair)_ in the sense of [[relative homology]].

=--

For instance ([Hatcher, prop. A.5](#Hatcher)).

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

For $A \hookrightarrow X$ the inclusion of a subcomplex into a CW complex, then the pair $(X,A)$ is often called a _[[CW-pair]]_. This appears notably in the [[axioms]] for [[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]].

=--

e.g. ([AGP 02, def. 5.1.11](#AGP02))


### Singular homology
 {#SingularHomology}

We discuss aspects of the [[singular homology]] $H_n(-) \colon $ [[Top]] $\to$ [[Ab]] of CW-complexes. See also at _[[cellular homology]] of CW-complexes_.

Let $X$ be a CW-complex and write 

$$
  X_0 \hookrightarrow X_1 \hookrightarrow X_2 \hookrightarrow \cdots \hookrightarrow X
$$

for its [[filtered topological space]]-structure with $X_{n+1}$ the topological space obtained from $X_n$ by gluing on $(n+1)$-cells. For $n \in \mathbb{N}$ write $nCells \in Set$ for the set of $n$-cells of $X$.


+-- {: .num_prop #SkeletalRelativeSingularHomologyOfCW}
###### Proposition

The [[relative singular homology]] of the filtering degrees is

$$
  H_n(X_k , X_{k-1})
  \simeq
  \left\{
    \array{
       \mathbb{Z}[nCells] & if\; k = n
       \\
       0 & otherwise
    }
  \right.
  \,,
$$

where $\mathbb{Z}[nCells]$ denotes the [[free abelian group]] on the set of $n$-cells.


=--

The proof is spelled out at _[Relative singular homology - Of CW complexes](relative+homology#RelativeHomologyOfCWComplexes)_.


+-- {: .num_prop #RelativeHomologyOfFilterStep}
###### Proposition

With $k,n \in \mathbb{N}$ we have

$$
  (k \gt n) \Rightarrow (H_k(X_n) \simeq 0)
  \,.
$$

In particular if $X$ is a CW-complex of finite [[dimension]] $dim X$ (the maximum degree of cells), then 

$$
  (k \gt dim X) \Rightarrow (H_k(X) \simeq 0).
$$

Moreover, for $k \lt n$ the inclusion

$$
  H_k(X_n) \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} H_k(X)
$$

is an [[isomorphism]] and for $k = n$ we have an isomorphism

$$
  image(H_n(X_n) \to H_n(X)) \simeq H_n(X)
  \,.
$$

=--

This is mostly for instance in ([Hatcher, lemma 2.34 b),c)](#Hatcher)).

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By the [[long exact sequence]] in [[relative homology]], discussed at _[Relative homology -- long exact sequences](relative+homology#LongExactSequences)_, we have an [[exact sequence]]

$$
  H_{k+1}(X_n , X_{n-1})
  \to 
  H_k(X_{n-1})
  \to 
  H_k(X_n)
  \to 
  H_k(X_n, X_{n-1})
  \,.
$$

Now by prop. \ref{SkeletalRelativeSingularHomologyOfCW} the leftmost and rightmost homology groups here vanish when $k \neq n$ and $k \neq n-1$ and hence exactness implies that

$$
  H_k(X_{n-1})
  \stackrel{\simeq}{\to}
  H_k(X_n)
$$

is an [[isomorphism]] for $k \neq n,n-1$. This implies the first claims by [[induction]] on $n$.

Finally for the last claim use that the above exact sequence gives

$$
  H_{n-1+1}(X_n , X_{n-1})
  \to 
  H_{n-1}(X_{n-1})
  \to 
  H_{n-1}(X_n)
  \to 
  0
$$

and hence that with the above the map $H_{n-1}(X_{n-1}) \to H_{n-1}(X)$ is surjective.


=--


## Examples

* The [[geometric realization]] of any locally finite [[simplicial set]] is a CW-complex ([Milnor 57](#Milnor57)). 

  * In particular in the context of the [[homotopy hypothesis]] the [[Quillen equivalence]]  between [[∞-groupoid]]s and [[nice topological space]]s maps each [[∞-groupoid]] to a CW-complex.

* any [[compact space|noncompact]] [[smooth manifold]] of [[dimension]] $n$ is [[homotopy equivalence|homotopy equivalent]] to an $(n-1)$-dimensional CW-complex. ([Napier-Ramachandran](#NapierRamachandran)).



## Related concepts

* [[cell complex]]

* [[CW approximation]]

* [[cellular homology]]

* [[simplicial set]], [[geometric realization]]

* [[CW-spectrum]]

* [[G-CW complex]]


## References

Basic textbook accounts include

* Brayton Gray, _Homotopy Theory: An Introduction to Algebraic Topology_, Academic Press, New York (1975). 

* [[George Whitehead]], chapter II of _Elements of homotopy theory_, 1978

* {#May} [[Peter May]], _[[A Concise Course in Algebraic Topology]]_, U. Chicago Press (1999) 

* {#Hatcher} [[Allen Hatcher]], _[Algebraic Topology](http://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/AT/ATpage.html)_, 2002
  
* {#HatcherTopologyOfCellComplexes} [[Allen Hatcher]], _Topology of cell complexes_ ([pdf](https://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/AT/ATapp.pdf)) in _Algebraic Topology_

* {#HatcherK} [[Alan Hatcher]], _Vector bundles & K-theory_ ([web](https://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/VBKT/VBpage.html))

* {#FP} Rudolf Fritsch and Renzo A. Piccinini, _Cellular structures in topology_, Cambridge studies in advanced mathematics Vol. 19, Cambridge University Press (1990). ([pdf](https://epub.ub.uni-muenchen.de/4493/1/4493.pdf)) 


* {#AGP02} Marcelo Aguilar, [[Samuel Gitler]], Carlos Prieto, section 5.1 of _Algebraic topology from a homotopical viewpoint_, Springer (2002) ([toc pdf](http://tocs.ulb.tu-darmstadt.de/106999419.pdf))

Original articles include

* {#Milnor59} [[John Milnor]], _On spaces having the homotopy type of a CW-complex_, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 90 (2) (1959), 272-280. 
  

* {#Milnor57} [[John Milnor]], _The geometric realization of a semi-simplicial complex_, Annals of Mathematics, 2nd Ser., __65__, n. 2. (Mar., 1957), pp. 357-362; [pdf](http://www.math.binghamton.edu/dwyer/Milnor-GeomReal.pdf)
 

See also

 * {#NapierRamachandran} Terrance Napier,  Mohan Ramachandran,  _[Elementary Construction of Exhausting Subsolutions of Elliptic Operators](http://www.unige.ch/math/EnsMath/EM_en/)_ L’Enseignement Math&eacute;matique, t. 50 (2004), p. 367 - 389.
 


An inconclusive discussion [here](http://nforum.mathforge.org/discussion/4135/simplicial-homology/?Focus=33785#Comment_33785) about what parts of the definition a CW complex should be [[stuff, structure, property|properties]] and what parts should be structure.


[[!redirects CW complex]]
[[!redirects CW-complex]]
[[!redirects CW complexes]]
[[!redirects CW-complexes]]

[[!redirects relative CW-complex]]
[[!redirects relative CW-complexes]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 108532 Revision date: 2016-05-10 10:57:32 Page name: CW complex Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 131.220.184.222

pages/384.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#CW complexes
* table of contents
{: toc}


## Idea

A **CW-complex** is a [[nice topological space]] which is or can be built up inductively, by a process of attaching [[n-disks]] $D^n$ along their [[boundary]] [[n-spheres|(n-1)-spehres]] $S^{n-1}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$: a [[cell complex]] built from the basic topological cells $S^{n-1} \hookrightarrow D^n$. 

Being, therefore,  essentially combinatorial objects, CW complexes are the principal objects of interest in [[algebraic topology]]; in fact, most spaces of interest to algebraic topologists are [[homotopy equivalence|homotopy equivalent]] to CW-complexes. Notably the [[geometric realization]] of every [[simplicial set]], hence also of every [[groupoid]], [[2-groupoid]], etc., is a CW complex. 

Also, CW complexes are the [[cofibrant objects]] in the [[classical model structure on topological spaces]]. 
This means in particular that _every_  topological space is _[[weak homotopy equivalence|weakly homotopy equivalent]]_ to a CW-complex (but need not be [[homotopy equivalence|strongly homotopy equivalent]] to one). See also at _[[CW-approximation]]_.  Since every topological space is a [[fibrant object]] in this [[model category]] structure, this means that the [[full subcategory]] of [[Top]] on the CW-complexes is a category of "homotopically very good representatives" of [[homotopy types]]. See at _[[homotopy theory]]_ and _[[homotopy hypothesis]]_ for more on this.

## Terminology
 {#Terminology}

The terminology "CW-complex" goes back to [[John Henry Constantine Whitehead]] (see [Hatcher, "Topology of cell complexes", p. 520](#HatcherTopologyOfCellComplexes)). It stands for the following two properties shared by any CW complex:

* **C** = "closure finiteness": a [[compact subset]] of a CW complex intersects the [[interior]] of only finitely many cells ([prop.](classical+model+structure+on+topological+spaces#CompactSubsetsAreSmallInCellComplexes)), hence in particular so does the closure of any cell.


* **W** = "weak topology": Since a CW-complex is a [[colimit]] in [[Top]] over its cells, and as such equipped with the [[final topology]] of the cell inclusion maps, a subset of a CW-complex is open or closed precisely if its restriction to (the closure of) each cell is open or closed, respectively.

(Whitehead called the [[interior]] of the [[n-disks]] the "cells", so that their closure of each cell is the corresponding $n$-disk.)


## Definition

A CW-complex is a topological space $X$ equipped with a sequence of spaces and continuous maps

\[\label{CW1}\varnothing = X_{-1} \hookrightarrow X_0 \hookrightarrow X_1 \hookrightarrow \ldots \hookrightarrow X_n \hookrightarrow \ldots
\]

and a [[cocone]] making $X$ into its [[colimit]] (in [[Top]], or else in the category of [[compactly generated space]]s or one of many other [[nice category of spaces|nice categories of spaces]]) where each space $X_n$ (called the $n$-skeleton of $X$) is the result of attaching copies of the $n$-disk $D^n = \{x \in \mathbb{R}^n: ||x|| \leq 1\}$ along their boundaries $S^{n-1} = \partial D^n$ to $X_{n-1}$. Specifically, $X_{-1}$ is the empty space, and each $X_n$ is a pushout in [[Top]] of a diagram of the form 

$$X_{n-1} \stackrel{(f_i)}{\leftarrow} \coprod_{i \in I} S_{i}^{n-1} \stackrel{\coprod_i j_i}{\to} \coprod_{i \in I} D_{i}^n$$ 

where $I$ is some index set, each $j_i: S_{i}^{n-1} \to D_{i}^n$ is the boundary inclusion of a copy of $D^n$, and 
$f_i: S_{i}^{n-1} \to X_{n-1}$ is a continuous map, often called an _attaching map_. The coprojections $X_{n-1} \to X_n$ of these pushouts give the arrows on which diagram (eq:CW1) is based. 

A relative CW-complex $(X, A)$ is defined as above, except $X_{-1} = A$ is allowed to be any space.

A _[[finite CW-complex]]_ is one which admits a presentation in which there are only finitely many attaching maps, and similarly a _countable CW-complex_ is one which admits a presentation with countably many attaching maps. 

Formally this means that (relative) CW-complexes are special (relative) [[cell complexes]] with respect to the [[cofibrantly generated model category|generating cofibrations]] in the standard [[Quillen model structure on topological spaces]]: they are those cell complexes which are obtained from a _countable_ [[transfinite composition]] of cell attachments, and where in addition the stage $X_n$ is obtained from $X_{n-1}$ by attaching cells of dimension $n$, instead of cells of arbitrary dimension.

A **cellular map** between CW-complexes $X$ and $Y$ is a [[continuous function]] $f\colon X \to Y$ such that $f(X_n) \subset Y_n$.

Milnor has argued that the category of spaces which are homotopy equivalent to CW-complexes, also called [[m-cofibrant spaces]], is a [[nice category of spaces|convenient category of spaces]] for [[algebraic topology]].


## Properties

### Closure properties

If $A \hookrightarrow X$ is an inclusion of CW-complexes, then the quotient $X/A$ is naturally itself a CW-complex, such that the quotient map $X \to X/A$ is cellular.


If $X$ is a CW-complex and $K$ is a [[finite CW-complex]], then the [[product topological space]] $X \times K$ is naturally itself a CW-complex.

For example the [[suspension]] of a CW-complex itself carries the structure of a CW-complex.

Similarly for [[pointed topological space|pointed]] CW-complexes: the [[smash product]] of a pointed CW-complex with a finite pointed CW-complex is a pointed CW-complex. For example the [[reduced suspension]] $S^1 \wedge X$ of a  pointed CW-complex $X$ is itself a CW-complex.


### Local contractibility
 {#LocalContractibility}


+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

A CW-complex is a [[locally contractible topological space]].

=--

For instance ([Hatcher, prop. A.4](#Hatcher)). 

### Compactness properties

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

Every CW-complex is a [[paracompact topological space]].

=--

See for instance ([Hatcher K-theory, appendix of section 1.2](#HatcherK)). For a discussion that highlights which [[axiom of choice|choice principles]] are involved, see ([Fritsch-Piccinini 90, Theorem 1.3.5 (p. 29 and following)](#FP)).

+-- {: .num_prop #CWComplexIsCompactlyGenerated}
###### Proposition

Every CW-complex is a [[compactly generated topological space]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Since a CW-complex $X$ is a [[colimit]] in [[Top]] over attachments of standard [[n-disks]] $D^{n_i}$ (its cells), by the characterization of colimits in $Top$ ([prop.](Top#DescriptionOfLimitsAndColimitsInTop)) a subset of $X$ is open or closed precisely if its restriction to each cell is open or closed, respectively. Since the $n$-disks are compact, this implies one direction: if a subset $A$ of $X$ intersected with all compact subsets is closed, then $A$ is closed. 

For the converse direction, since [[a CW-complex is a Hausdorff space]] and since [[compact subspaces of Hausdorff spaces are closed]], the intersection of a closed subset with a compact subset is closed.

=--


### Up to homotopy equivalence 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 

Every CW complex is homotopy equivalent to (the [realization](simplicial+complex#geometric_realisations_and_polyhedra) of) a [[simplicial complex]]. 

=-- 

See [Gray](#Gray), Corollary 16.44 (p. 149) and Corollary 21.15 (p. 206).  For more see at _[[CW approximation]]_.

+-- {: .num_cor} 
###### Corollary 
Every CW complex is homotopy equivalent to a space that admits a [[good open cover]]. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 

If $Y$ has the [[homotopy type]] of a CW complex and $X$ is a [[finite CW complex]], then the [[mapping space]] $Y^X$ with the [[compact-open topology]] has the homotopy type of a CW complex. 

=-- 

([Milnor 59](#Milnor59)) 

### Subcomplexes
 {#Subcomplexes}

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

For $X$ a CW complex, the inclusion $X' \hookrightarrow X$ of any subcomplex has an [[open neighbourhood]] in $X$ which is a [[deformation retract]] of $X'$. In particular such an inclusion is a _[good pair](relative+homology#GoodPair)_ in the sense of [[relative homology]].

=--

For instance ([Hatcher, prop. A.5](#Hatcher)).

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

For $A \hookrightarrow X$ the inclusion of a subcomplex into a CW complex, then the pair $(X,A)$ is often called a _[[CW-pair]]_. This appears notably in the [[axioms]] for [[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]].

=--

e.g. ([AGP 02, def. 5.1.11](#AGP02))


### Singular homology
 {#SingularHomology}

We discuss aspects of the [[singular homology]] $H_n(-) \colon $ [[Top]] $\to$ [[Ab]] of CW-complexes. See also at _[[cellular homology]] of CW-complexes_.

Let $X$ be a CW-complex and write 

$$
  X_0 \hookrightarrow X_1 \hookrightarrow X_2 \hookrightarrow \cdots \hookrightarrow X
$$

for its [[filtered topological space]]-structure with $X_{n+1}$ the topological space obtained from $X_n$ by gluing on $(n+1)$-cells. For $n \in \mathbb{N}$ write $nCells \in Set$ for the set of $n$-cells of $X$.


+-- {: .num_prop #SkeletalRelativeSingularHomologyOfCW}
###### Proposition

The [[relative singular homology]] of the filtering degrees is

$$
  H_n(X_k , X_{k-1})
  \simeq
  \left\{
    \array{
       \mathbb{Z}[nCells] & if\; k = n
       \\
       0 & otherwise
    }
  \right.
  \,,
$$

where $\mathbb{Z}[nCells]$ denotes the [[free abelian group]] on the set of $n$-cells.


=--

The proof is spelled out at _[Relative singular homology - Of CW complexes](relative+homology#RelativeHomologyOfCWComplexes)_.


+-- {: .num_prop #RelativeHomologyOfFilterStep}
###### Proposition

With $k,n \in \mathbb{N}$ we have

$$
  (k \gt n) \Rightarrow (H_k(X_n) \simeq 0)
  \,.
$$

In particular if $X$ is a CW-complex of finite [[dimension]] $dim X$ (the maximum degree of cells), then 

$$
  (k \gt dim X) \Rightarrow (H_k(X) \simeq 0).
$$

Moreover, for $k \lt n$ the inclusion

$$
  H_k(X_n) \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} H_k(X)
$$

is an [[isomorphism]] and for $k = n$ we have an isomorphism

$$
  image(H_n(X_n) \to H_n(X)) \simeq H_n(X)
  \,.
$$

=--

This is mostly for instance in ([Hatcher, lemma 2.34 b),c)](#Hatcher)).

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By the [[long exact sequence]] in [[relative homology]], discussed at _[Relative homology -- long exact sequences](relative+homology#LongExactSequences)_, we have an [[exact sequence]]

$$
  H_{k+1}(X_n , X_{n-1})
  \to 
  H_k(X_{n-1})
  \to 
  H_k(X_n)
  \to 
  H_k(X_n, X_{n-1})
  \,.
$$

Now by prop. \ref{SkeletalRelativeSingularHomologyOfCW} the leftmost and rightmost homology groups here vanish when $k \neq n$ and $k \neq n-1$ and hence exactness implies that

$$
  H_k(X_{n-1})
  \stackrel{\simeq}{\to}
  H_k(X_n)
$$

is an [[isomorphism]] for $k \neq n,n-1$. This implies the first claims by [[induction]] on $n$.

Finally for the last claim use that the above exact sequence gives

$$
  H_{n-1+1}(X_n , X_{n-1})
  \to 
  H_{n-1}(X_{n-1})
  \to 
  H_{n-1}(X_n)
  \to 
  0
$$

and hence that with the above the map $H_{n-1}(X_{n-1}) \to H_{n-1}(X)$ is surjective.


=--


## Examples

* The [[geometric realization]] of any locally finite [[simplicial set]] is a CW-complex ([Milnor 57](#Milnor57)). 

  * In particular in the context of the [[homotopy hypothesis]] the [[Quillen equivalence]]  between [[∞-groupoid]]s and [[nice topological space]]s maps each [[∞-groupoid]] to a CW-complex.

* any [[compact space|noncompact]] [[smooth manifold]] of [[dimension]] $n$ is [[homotopy equivalence|homotopy equivalent]] to an $(n-1)$-dimensional CW-complex. ([Napier-Ramachandran](#NapierRamachandran)).



## Related concepts

* [[cell complex]]

* [[CW approximation]]

* [[cellular homology]]

* [[simplicial set]], [[geometric realization]]

* [[CW-spectrum]]

* [[G-CW complex]]


## References

Basic textbook accounts include

* Brayton Gray, _Homotopy Theory: An Introduction to Algebraic Topology_, Academic Press, New York (1975). 

* [[George Whitehead]], chapter II of _Elements of homotopy theory_, 1978

* {#May} [[Peter May]], _[[A Concise Course in Algebraic Topology]]_, U. Chicago Press (1999) 

* {#Hatcher} [[Allen Hatcher]], _[Algebraic Topology](http://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/AT/ATpage.html)_, 2002
  
* {#HatcherTopologyOfCellComplexes} [[Allen Hatcher]], _Topology of cell complexes_ ([pdf](https://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/AT/ATapp.pdf)) in _Algebraic Topology_

* {#HatcherK} [[Alan Hatcher]], _Vector bundles & K-theory_ ([web](https://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/VBKT/VBpage.html))

* {#FP} Rudolf Fritsch and Renzo A. Piccinini, _Cellular structures in topology_, Cambridge studies in advanced mathematics Vol. 19, Cambridge University Press (1990). ([pdf](https://epub.ub.uni-muenchen.de/4493/1/4493.pdf)) 


* {#AGP02} Marcelo Aguilar, [[Samuel Gitler]], Carlos Prieto, section 5.1 of _Algebraic topology from a homotopical viewpoint_, Springer (2002) ([toc pdf](http://tocs.ulb.tu-darmstadt.de/106999419.pdf))

Original articles include

* {#Milnor59} [[John Milnor]], _On spaces having the homotopy type of a CW-complex_, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 90 (2) (1959), 272-280. 
  

* {#Milnor57} [[John Milnor]], _The geometric realization of a semi-simplicial complex_, Annals of Mathematics, 2nd Ser., __65__, n. 2. (Mar., 1957), pp. 357-362; [pdf](http://www.math.binghamton.edu/dwyer/Milnor-GeomReal.pdf)
 

See also

 * {#NapierRamachandran} Terrance Napier,  Mohan Ramachandran,  _[Elementary Construction of Exhausting Subsolutions of Elliptic Operators](http://www.unige.ch/math/EnsMath/EM_en/)_ L’Enseignement Math&eacute;matique, t. 50 (2004), p. 367 - 389.
 


An inconclusive discussion [here](http://nforum.mathforge.org/discussion/4135/simplicial-homology/?Focus=33785#Comment_33785) about what parts of the definition a CW complex should be [[stuff, structure, property|properties]] and what parts should be structure.


[[!redirects CW complex]]
[[!redirects CW-complex]]
[[!redirects CW complexes]]
[[!redirects CW-complexes]]

[[!redirects relative CW-complex]]
[[!redirects relative CW-complexes]]
