
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Functional analysis
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include functional analysis - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[microlocal analysis]], the _wave front set_ ([Hörmander 70](#Hoermander70)) of a [[generalized function]] such as a [[distribution]] or a [[hyperfunction]] is a characterization of the singularity structure of the generalized function, hence of how it deviates from being an ordinary smooth function.

The wave front set is the sub-bundle of the [[cotangent bundle]] that consists of all those directions (non-zero co-vectors) such that the local [[Fourier transform]] of the distribution is not rapidly decaying in this direction ([Hörmander 90, section 8.1](#Hoermander90)). Ths definition turns out to make invariant sense.

The [[projection]] of the wave front set down to the base space is the [[singular support of a distribution|singular support]] of the distribution. The additional information in the "wave front" covectors over this singular support may be understood as providing the directions of _propagation of these singularities_. This is made precise by the _[[propagation of singularities theorem]]_

A notorious issue with [[distributions]] is that, when thought of as generalized functions, generally neither their [[composition of distributions]] nor their pointwise [[product of distributions]] is defined. However, closer inspection shows that the obstruction to these operations being defined for any given pair of distributions is exactly characterized by the wave front set:

For instance the [[product of distributions]] is well defined precisely if the sum of their wave front sets does not intersect the zero-section ([Hörmander 90, theorem 8.2.10](#Hoermander90)).



## Definition

### Motivation

The definition of wavefront sets is motivated by a version of a [[Paley-Wiener theorem]] that characterizes smooth compactly supported functions ($\mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$) by a growth condition on their [[Fourier transform]] $\mathcal{F}$:

+-- {: .num_theorem}
###### Theorem
**(Paley-Wiener for $C^{\infty}_0$)**


The vector space $C_0^{\infty}(\mathbb{R}^n)$ of [[smooth function|smooth]] [[compact support|compactly supported]] functions ([[bump functions]]) is (algebraically and topologically) [[isomorphism|isomorphic]], via the [[Fourier transform]], to the space of [[entire functions]] $F$ which satisfy the following estimate: there is a positive constant $B$ such that for every [[integer]] $m \gt 0$ there is a constant $C_m$ such that:
$$ 
      F(z) \le C_m (1 + |z|)^{-m} \exp{ (B \; |\operatorname{Im}(z)|)}
$$ 

=--

### Smoothness

We call a smooth compactly supported function that is identically $1$ in a neighbourhood of a point $x_0$ a **cutoff** function at $x_0$.
Let $U \subset \mathbb{R}^n$ be open, we identify the [[cotangent bundle]] of $U$ with $U \times \mathbb{R}^n$. A subset of $U \times \mathbb{R}^n$ is said to be **conic** if it is stable under the transformation
$$
    (x, \zeta) \mapsto (x, \rho \zeta) \quad \text{with} \; \rho \gt 0
$$

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

Let $f$ be a distribution and $(x_0, \zeta_0)$ with $\zeta_0 \neq 0$ be a point of the cotangent bundle of $U$. $f$ is **smooth** in $(x_0, \zeta_0)$ if there is a cutoff function $\chi$ in $x_0$ and an open cone $\Gamma_0$ in $\mathbb{R}^n$ containing $\zeta_0$ such that for every $m \gt 0$ there is a nonnegative constant $C_m$ such that for all $\zeta \in \Gamma_0$:
$$
\| \mathcal{F}(\chi f) (\zeta)   \| \le C_m (1 + \| \zeta \|)^{-m}
$$ 
where $\mathcal{F}(\chi f)$ is the [[Fourier transform]] (of the variable $\zeta$) of the function $\chi f$ (of the variable $x$).

=--


+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A distribution $f$ is smooth in a conic subset $\Gamma$ of the cotangent bundle of $U$ if $f$ is smooth in a neighbourhood of every point in $\Gamma$.

=--


### Wavefront set

Let $U \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n$ be an open subset, $T^* U$ its cotangent bundle and $f$ be a distribution on $U$. The complement of the union of all conic subsets of $T^* U$ where $f$ is smooth is the **wavefront set $WF(f)$**.


## Examples

### One-dimensional Examples

We take a brief look at distributions on $\mathcal{D} (\mathbb{R})$ with singular support consisting of the origin. In one dimension, at the origin, there are of course exactly two directions along which a distribution could be smooth, namely $\zeta \lt 0$ and $\zeta \gt 0$.

We define the [[Fourier transform]] to be
$$
\mathcal{F}(f)(\zeta) = \hat f (\zeta) = \int_{- \infty}^{\infty} f(x) \exp(-2 \pi i x \zeta) dx
$$

For the delta distribution $\delta$, we have $\mathcal{F}(\delta) = 1$, which does not satisfy the decay condition of smoothness.

## Properties


+-- {: .num_prop #EmptyWaveFronSetCorrespondsToOrdinaryFunction}
###### Proposition
**(empty wave front set corresponds to ordinary functions)**

The wave front set of a [[compactly supported distribution]] is empty precisely if the distribution comes from an ordinary smooth function (hence a [[bump function]]). 

=--

e.g. ([Hörmander 90, below (8.1.1)](#Hoermander90))

## References

### General

The concept of wave front set is due to

* {#Hoermander70} [[Lars Hörmander]], _Linear differential operators_, Actes Congr. Int. Math. Nice 1970, 1, 121-133

A textbook account for distributions on open subsets of [[Euclidean space]] is in

* {#Hoermander90} [[Lars Hörmander]], section 8.1 of _The analysis of linear partial differential operators_, vol. I, Springer 1983, 1990

and for distributions more generally on smooth manifolds is in 

* {#Hoermander94} [[Lars Hörmander]], _The analysis of linear partial differential operators_, vol. III, Springer 1994

A history of the concept of wave front sets with extensive pointers to the 
literature is given in [Hörmander 90, p. 322-324](#Hoermander90).

See also

* Wikipedia: [wavefront set] (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wavefront_set)

### In quantum field theory

The application of [[microlocal analysis]] via wave front sets to the discussion of [[n-point functions]] in [[quantum field theory]] and especially [[quantum field theory on curved spacetimes]] apparently originates with 

* C. Moreno, _Spaces of positive and negative  frequency  solutions of  field equations in curved  space- times. I.  The Klein-Gordon  equation in stationary  space-times, II. The massive  vector field equations in static  space-times_, J. Math.  Phys. 18, 2153-61 (1977), J. Math.  Phys. 19, 92-99 (1978)

*  [[Jonathan Dimock]], _Scalar  quantum field  in  an external  gravitational  background_,  J. Math.  Phys. 20, 2549-2555 (1979)

A textbook account amplifying this usage is in the mathematically rigorous construction of [[perturbative quantum field theory]] via [[causal perturbation theory]] is in 

* {#Scharf95} [[Günter Scharf]], _[[Finite Quantum Electrodynamics -- The Causal Approach]]_, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1995, 2nd edition

* {#Scharf01} [[Günter Scharf]], _[[Quantum Gauge Theories -- A True Ghost Story]]_, Wiley 2001

For more see the references at _[[locally covariant perturbative quantum field theory]]_.

[[!redirects wavefront sets]]

[[!redirects wave front set]]
[[!redirects wave front sets]]
