Interloper/dilettante. "Functional analyst", who sometimes wonders if the term meant something different in Britain that it does in North America. Keeps finding category-theoretic things all over the place in *old* analysis, never mind the brave new world of NCG, and is starting to feel that they should be collated somewhere.

* [website](http://maths.lancs.ac.uk/~choiy1/)

### To do list ###
Some things I am considering trying to write about, or contribute to. (This is mainly meant as a list to remind or nag me to write things down.)
* [[projective Banach space|projective, injective and flat Banach spaces]] (both in the metric and topological categories of [[Banach space]]s)
* RKHS
* the bidualization monad on [[Banach space]]s
* Kaijser and Wick-Pelletier's work on interpolation
* Arens-Eells spaces, a.k.a. the adjunction between Banach spaces and metric spaces.
* Richard Arens's paper using "phyla", or: where Banach algebras and [[symmetric monoidal categories]] should have met. (There is now some stuff on [[Banach algebra#Arens products|Arens products]] on the [[Banach algebra|Banach algebras]] page.)
* Categori(c)al basics of operator spaces: MAX, MIN, and various tensor products
* functorial aspects of the group von Neumann algebra construction
* cabbages
* kings
* whether pigs have wings



### A survey paper which is more rewarding than this page ###
J.M.F. Castillo. The hitchhiker guide to categorical Banach space theory. Part I.
Extracta Math. 25(2) (2010), 103--149.

(Currently freely available on the [journal's website](http://www.eweb.unex.es/eweb/extracta/) )

category: people

[[!redirects YemonChoi]]