
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Functional analysis
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functional analysis - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

##Idea

A convenient vector spaces is a [[locally convex topological vector space]] satisfying a certain [[complete locally convex topological vector space|completeness]] property.  Loosely, the completeness property is that such that "all derivatives which ought to exist actually do".

The term _convenient vector space_ was introduced by Kriegl and Michor as part of their theory of global analysis.  It is equivalent to the notion _locally complete_ which is more usual in [[functional analysis]].

## Definition

There are various equivalent definitions of a _convenient_ vector space, a long list is given in Theorem 2.14 of [KM](#KM).  We shall give the definition that is closest to its _raison d'être_, namely the existence of derivatives.

+-- {: .num_defn #ConSp}
###### Definition 
A [[locally convex topological vector space]] $E$ is said to be **convenient** or **$c^\infty$-complete** if whenever $c \colon \mathbb{R} \to E$ is a curve such that $l \circ c \colon \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}$ is smooth for all $l \in E^*$ then $c$ is smooth.
=--

We shall give one other characterisation which recasts the definition in language more common in functional analysis.

+-- {: .num_defn #LocCpt}
###### Definition
A [[locally convex topological vector space]], $E$, is said to be **locally complete** if for $B \subseteq E$ a [[bounded]], [[closed]], [[absolutely convex]] subset then its norm space, $E_B$, is a [[Banach space]].
=--

The equivalence of these two forms part of Theorem 2.14 of [KM](#KM).

Other equivalent characterizations of convenient vector spaces $E$ are:


* $E$ is a [[locally convex vector space]] and every [[Mackey-Cauchy sequences]] in $E$ converges.

* $E$ is a [[locally convex vector space]] and for every smooth curve $c : \mathbb{R} \to E$ there is a curve $\int c$ such that $c$ is the [[derivative]] of $\int c$.

See for instance ([Blute](#Blute)).

## Examples

* A [[Cartesian space]] $\mathbb{R}^n$ carries a unique structure of a convenient vector space. This also holds for [[Fréchet space]]s in general and countable strict locally convex inductive limits thereof. (See [[LF space]]).

* For $X$ and $Y$ to convenient vector spaces, the vector space of [[smooth function]]s $C^\infty(X,Y)$ is again a convenient vector space. This is to a large degree the motivating example. It makes the category of convenient vector spaces by Cartesian closed. (See below).

## Properties

* The [[category]] of convenient vector spaces and [[smooth function]]s between them is a [[cartesian closed category]].

* The definition of a convenient vector space has a natural interpretation in terms of [[Frölicher space]]s. It may also be related to [[synthetic differential geometry]]: convenient vector spaces form a [[full subcategory]] of the [[Cahiers topos]] ([Kock](#Kock),[KockReyes](#KockReyes)).

## Related concepts

* [[convenient manifold]]

## References

A standard textbook reference is

* [[Andreas Kriegl]], [[Peter Michor]]: _The convenient setting of global analysis_, AMS (1997) ([pdf](http://www.mat.univie.ac.at/~michor/apbookh.pdf))
 {#KM}

A survey is for instance in the slides

* Richard Blute, _Convenient Vector Spaces, Convenient Manifolds and Differential Linear Logic_ (2011) ([pdf](http://aix1.uottawa.ca/~rblute/FMCS.pdf))
 {#Blute}

Results on equivalent characterizations are for instance in

* Thomas E. Gilsdorf, _Strictly Webbed Convenient Locally Convex Spaces_, Int. Journal of Math. Analysis, Vol. 1, 2007, no. 16, 775 - 782 ([pdf](http://www.m-hikari.com/ijma/ijma-password-2007/ijma-password13-16-2007/gilsdorfIJMA13-16-2007.pdf))

The embedding of convenient vector spaces into the [[Cahiers topos]] and hence the treatment of their differential geometry by [[synthetic differential geometry]] is due to

* [[Anders Kock]], _Convenient vector spaces embed into the Cahiers topos_, Cahiers de Topologie et Géométrie Différentielle Catégoriques, 27 no. 1 (1986), p. 3-17  ([numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CTGDC_1986__27_1_3_0))
  {#Kock}

and with a corrected definition of the site of definition in

* [[Anders Kock]], [[Gonzalo Reyes]], _Corrigendum and addenda to: Convenient vector spaces embed into the Cahiers topos_, Cahiers de Topologie et Géométrie Différentielle Catégoriques, 27 no. 1 (1986), p. 3-17 ([numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CTGDC_1987__28_2_99_0))
 {#KockReyes}



[[!redirects convenient vector spaces]]
[[!redirects locally complete topological vector space]]
[[!redirects locally complete]]
[[!redirects locally complete vector space]]