[[!redirects Template page]]
# Contents
* 
{: toc}

## Idea
In the topos Sets, the sub object classifier $\Omega$ is any two element set according to [1], and which, according to [2], also is a classical bit of information. Since the classical bit underlies classical physics according to [2] and the classical bit is a sub object classifier in the topos Sets [1], then it seems natural to ask whether the quantum bit is a sub object classifier in some suitable topos. I do not know the answer to this question, but if the answer is yes, then sub object classifiers of topoi would be very worthy of intense (and I think consistent with the overall 
$n$POV) study in order to try to get a deeper understanding of the nature of information, in its various forms.

I am not sure if any of this is useful, or belongs here, and so if this is out of place, I apologize. 

The following is an observation noted about sub object classifiers of a Topos. 

Let $\Eta$ be a topos, $\Omega$, $1$ the sub object classifier and terminal object in $\Eta$, respectively. Let $truth$:$1 \to \Omega$  be the universal monic from $1$ to $\Omega$ in $\Eta$. Let $\delta$ be the unique morphism from $\Omega \to 1$ in $\Eta$. Then since $1$ is the terminal object in $\Eta$, $\delta \circ truth$ is equal to the identity morphism on $1$. If $truth \circ \delta$ were equal to the identity on the sub classifier $\Omega$, then $\delta \circ truth$ together with $truth \circ \delta$ would define an isomorphism from $\Omega \to 1$ in $\Eta$. Thus, the only thing that keeps the sub object classifier from being isomorphic to the terminal object $\Eta$ is the failure of $truth \circ \delta$ to be equal to the identity morphism on $\Omega$. 


   
Theorem:  Let $\Eta$ be a topos, then the sub object classifier $\Omega$ of $\Eta$ is isomorphic to the terminal object $1$ in $\Eta$ iff the unique arrow $\delta$:$\Omega \to 1$ in $\Eta$ is a monic.

Proof: If $\delta$:$\Omega \to 1$ in $\Eta$ is an isomorphism, then by [3], $\delta$ is both monic and epic, and hence $\delta$:$\Omega \to 1$ is a mono $\Eta$. The proof of the converse is given in Theorem 1 of [4]. 
 
For a locally small topos $\Eta$, the failure of $\delta$:$\Omega \to 1$ in $\Eta$ to be monic requires there to exist at least one object A in $\Eta$ such that $\Eta$ $(A,\Omega)$  has at least two distinct elements. For otherwise, $\Omega \in \Eta$ would be a terminal object (since there always exists at least one arrow from any object $A$ in $\Eta$ to $\Omega$ given by $truth \circ \delta_{A}$, where $\delta_{A}$ is the unique arrow from $A$ to the terminal object 1 in $\Eta$ and $truth$ is the universal monic from the terminal object 1 to the sub object classifier $\Omega$ in $\Eta$ ), and since terminal objects are unique up to unique isomorphism [1], this would result in $\Omega$ being isomorphic to 1 in $\Eta$.

In Sets, the failure of the unique arrow from the two element set to the one element set in Sets encodes the notion that a two element set is too large to be a subset of a one element set. Or, if we think of the two element set as one bit of information, and the one element set as a state space with a single state in it, then the failure of the unique arrow from the two element set to the one element set in Sets encodes the notion that
for a single classical bit cannot (or is somehow to big to) encode a single classical state, as one classical bit encodes exactly two distinct states. So, at least in Sets, the unique arrow from the two element set to the one element set not being monic encodes the notion that the sub object classifier in Sets encodes the distinction between two distinct objects, the distinct objects being the elements of the two element set (and distinguishes objects in Sets in a way that the singleton cannot). Do toposes containing a sub object classifier that is not isomorphic to terminal object in the respective topoi also encode the notion of that sub object classifier being able to distinguish distinct objects in the respective topoi? 

Any thoughts, or modifications and improvements to this article are most welcome, and appreciated! 



## References  

*[1] Saunders Mac Lane & Ieke Moerdijk, Sheaves in Geometry and Logic: A First Introduction to Topos Theory.

*[2] Professor Leonard Susskind, Understanding Modern Physics Video([Video Lecture](http://www.openculture.com/2008/07/susskindlecture.html)).

*[3] Dr Bartosz Klin, ([pdf](http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/teaching/0910/L12/CTCS-lect3.pdf)).


*[4] Edwin Schasteen, Mathematical Conflict Theory Development: A Topos Theory Perspective  ([Hubpages](
http://conflicttheory.hubpages.com/hub/Mathematical-Conflict-Theory-Development-A-Topos-Theory-Perspective)).

