
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Factorization systems
+--{: .hide}
[[!include factorization systems - contents]]
=--
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--




#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Roughly speaking, a **factorization system** on a [[category]] consists of two classes of [[morphism|maps]], $L$ and $R$, such that every map factors into an $L$-map followed by an $R$-map, and the $L$-maps and $R$-maps satisfy some [[lifting property|lifting]] or diagonal fill-in property.  The various ways of filling in the details give rise to many kinds of factorization systems:

* In most of the literature, "factorization system" unqualified refers specifically to [[orthogonal factorization system]]s (OFS).

* [[weak factorization system]]s (WFS) are "more general" than orthogonal ones, in the sense that every OFS is also a WFS.  But since the most important examples of WFS (those that occur in [[model category|model categories]]) are not OFS, intuitively they are more or less independent concepts.

* [[algebraic weak factorization system]]s (AWFS) are a strengthened "algebraic" version of WFS in which the factorizations are functorial and the two classes of maps are algebraic.

* In an [[enriched category]] it is natural to consider [[enriched factorization system|enriched (orthogonal) factorization systems]].  The enriched version of WFS falls under [[enriched model category|enriched model categories]].

* In a [[bicategory]] (i.e. a possibly non-strict [[2-category]]) one wants instead the notion of [[factorization system in a 2-category]], which is like a Cat-enriched OFS "up to isomorphism."  The situation in an [[n-category]] is analogous; see for instance [[orthogonal factorization system in an (∞,1)-category]].

* In a [[strict 2-category]] there is also the notion of an [[enhanced factorization system|enhanced (orthogonal) factorization system]], of which the main example is [[bo-ff factorization system|(bo,ff)]] in [[Cat]].

* A [[strict factorization system]] is one in which the factorizations are specified uniquely on the nose, rather than merely up to isomorphism.

* A [[factorization system over a subcategory]] is a common generalization of orthogonal and strict factorization systems, which requires uniqueness of factorizations only up to specified zigzags.

Particular examples of factorization systems of various sorts can be found on the individual pages referred to above.


## Higher-ary factorization systems

The above notion of "binary" factorization system can be generalized to factor a morphism into more than two factors.

* The orthogonal 3-ary version is a [[ternary factorization system]].

* This has a generalization to a [[k-ary factorization system]].

* The corresponding 3-ary version for *weak* factorization systems is closely related to the notion of [[model category]] (one of the main applications of weak factorization systems).


## Related concepts

* [[anodyne morphism]], [[small object argument]]

* [[Joyal-Tierney calculus]]

## References

* [[joyalscatlab:HomePage|Joyal's CatLab]], _[[joyalscatlab:Factorization systems]]_

The factorization systems were probably first introduced in 

* [[S. MacLane]], _Duality for groups_,  Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. __56__,  (1950). 485--516, [MR0049192](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=0049192), [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/S0002-9904-1950-09427-0)
* J. R. Isbell, _Some remarks concerning categories and subspaces_, Canad. J. Math. __9__ (1957), 563--577; [MR0094405](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=0094405)

* [[Ross Street]], _Notes on factorization systems_, ([pdf](http://www.maths.mq.edu.au/~street/factoriz.pdf))
[[!redirects factorization systems]]
