pages/405.md, before:

[[!redirects cube category]]
# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Notation

We denote by $\square_{\leq 1}$ the category defined uniquely (up to isomorphism) by the following.

1) There are exactly two objects, which we shall denote by $I^{0}$ and $I^{1}$.

2) There are exactly two arrows $i_{0}, i_{1} : I^{0} \rightarrow I^{1}$.

3) There is exactly one arrow $p : I^{1} \rightarrow I^{0}$.

4) There are no other non-identity arrows.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Remark

In particular, the diagram 

$$
   \array{
      I^{0}  & \overset{i_{0}}{\to}    & I^{1} \\
             & \underset{id}{\searrow} & \downarrow p \\
             &                         & I^{0}
   }
$$

commutes in $\square_{\leq 1}$, and the diagram 

$$
   \array{
      I^{0}  & \overset{i_{1}}{\to}    & I^{1} \\
             & \underset{id}{\searrow} & \downarrow p \\
             &                         & I^{0}
   }
$$

commutes in $\square_{\leq 1}$.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

The _category of cubes_ is the [[free strict monoidal category]] on $\square_{\leq 1}$ whose unit object is $I^{0}$.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Notation

We denote the category of cubes by $\square$.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Terminology

We refer to $\square$ as the _category of cubes_.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Remark

It is _not_ the case that $\square$ is the free strict monoidal category on $\square_{\leq 1}$. Rather, $\square$ is the free strict monoidal category _with specified unit_ on $\square_{\leq 1}$, where the unit is specified to be $I^{0}$.

=--

## Notation

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Notation

Let $n \geq 0$ be an integer. We often denote the object $\underbrace{I^{1} \otimes \cdots \otimes I^{1}}_{n}$ of $\square$ by $I^{n}$. 

=--

## Expository material

For expository and other material, see [[category of cubes - exposition]].

Commit message:

Revision ID: 107664 Revision date: 2016-04-17 14:21:13 Page name: category of cubes Author: Richard Williamson IP address: 62.16.228.203

pages/405.md, after:

[[!redirects cube category]]
# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn #NotationOneTruncatedCategoryOfCubes}
###### Notation

We denote by $\square_{\leq 1}$ the category defined uniquely (up to isomorphism) by the following.

1) There are exactly two objects, which we shall denote by $I^{0}$ and $I^{1}$.

2) There are exactly two arrows $i_{0}, i_{1} : I^{0} \rightarrow I^{1}$.

3) There is exactly one arrow $p : I^{1} \rightarrow I^{0}$.

4) There are no non-identity arrows $I^{0} \rightarrow I^{0}$. 

5) There are exactly two non-identity arrows $I^{1} \rightarrow I^{1}$, which are $i_{0} \circ p$ and $i_{1} \circ p$.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn #RemarkCommutativeDiagrams}
###### Remark

In particular, because of 4) in Notation \ref{NotationOneTruncatedCategoryOfCubes}, the diagram 

$$
   \array{
      I^{0}  & \overset{i_{0}}{\to}    & I^{1} \\
             & \underset{id}{\searrow} & \downarrow p \\
             &                         & I^{0}
   }
$$

commutes in $\square_{\leq 1}$, and the diagram 

$$
   \array{
      I^{0}  & \overset{i_{1}}{\to}    & I^{1} \\
             & \underset{id}{\searrow} & \downarrow p \\
             &                         & I^{0}
   }
$$

commutes in $\square_{\leq 1}$.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Remark

The category $\square_{\leq 1}$ can also be constructed by beginning with the free category on the directed graph defined uniquely by the fact that 1), 2), and 3) in Notation \ref{NotationOneTruncatedCategoryOfCubes} hold, and by the fact that there are no other non-identity arrows. One then takes a quotient of this free category which forces the diagrams in Remark \ref{RemarkCommutativeDiagrams} to commute. 

This quotient can be expressed as a colimit in the category of small categories, or, which ultimately amounts to the same, by means of the equivalence relation $\sim$ on the arrows of the free category generated by requiring that $p \circ i_{0} \sim id$ and $p \circ i_{1} \sim id$, and by requiring that $g_{1} \circ g_{0} \sim f_{1} \circ f_{0}$ if $g_{1} \sim f_{1}$ and $g_{0} \sim f_{0}$. 

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

The _category of cubes_ is the [[free strict monoidal category]] on $\square_{\leq 1}$ whose unit object is $I^{0}$.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Notation

We denote the category of cubes by $\square$.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Terminology

We refer to $\square$ as the _category of cubes_.

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Remark

It is _not_ the case that $\square$ is the free strict monoidal category on $\square_{\leq 1}$. Rather, $\square$ is the free strict monoidal category _with specified unit_ on $\square_{\leq 1}$, where the unit is specified to be $I^{0}$.

=--

## Notation

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Notation

Let $n \geq 0$ be an integer. We often denote the object $\underbrace{I^{1} \otimes \cdots \otimes I^{1}}_{n}$ of $\square$ by $I^{n}$. 

=--

## Variants

There are several useful variations of $\square$, to be described on other pages in the future.

## Expository material

For expository and other material, see [[category of cubes - exposition]].
