
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The syntagm *chiral algebra* has two meanings: one in physics and a related but more specific one after the work of Beilinson-Drinfeld. In QFT the chiral operator has two classes of eigenmodes left-handed
and right-handed; they give rise to left and right chiral fields. CFT in 2d, in particular has two chiral parts expressed via holomorphic and antiholomorphic functions in OPEs. 

[[Beilinson]] and [[Drinfel'd]] were unhappy with non-illuminating definition of [[vertex operator algebra]] and invented a mathematical definition of version of chiral [[conformal field theory]] on an algebraic curve, under the name __chiral algebra__; their manuscript has being circulating from around 1995 as a long preprint and being more recently published by Amer. Math. Soc.  

## Related concepts

* [[factorization algebra]]

* [[full field algebra]]

## References

The standard textbook is

* [[Alexander Beilinson]], [[Vladimir Drinfeld]], _[[Chiral Algebras]]_, Colloqium Publications __51__,  Amer. Math. Soc. 2004, [gbooks](http://books.google.hr/books?id=yHZh3p-kFqQC&lpg=PP1&vq=%22Two-dimensional%20conformal%20geometry%20and%20vertex%20operator%20algebras%22&dq=isbn%3A0817638296&pg=PP1#v=onepage&q=%22Two-dimensional%20conformal%20geometry%20and%20vertex%20operator%20algebras%22&f=false)

An "example-driven digest" with applications in [[string theory]] is 

* [[Dennis Gaitsgory]], _Notes on 2d conformal field theory and string theory_, from p. 1017 on in

  [[Pierre Deligne]], [[P. Etingof]], [[D. Freed]], L. Jeffrey, [[D. Kazhdan]], J. Morgan, D.R. Morrison and [[Edward Witten]], eds.  , _[[Quantum Fields and Strings]], A course for mathematicians_, 2 vols. Amer. Math. Soc. Providence 1999. ([web version](http://www.math.ias.edu/qft))

Generalization to [[higher algebra]] is discussed in 

* [[Dennis Gaitsgory]], [[John Francis]] _Chiral Koszul duality_ ([arXiv:1103.5803](http://arxiv.org/abs/1103.5803))
 {#GaitsgoryFrancis}

Other references

* N. Rozenblyum, _Modules over a chiral algebra_, [arxiv/1010.1998](http://arxiv.org/abs/1010.1998)


[[!redirects chiral algebras]]