
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### $(\infty,1)$-Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include quasi-category theory contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea

The generalization of the notion of [[exact functor]]/[[flat functor]] from [[category theory]] to [[(∞,1)-category theory]].

## Definition

As for 1-categorical exact functors, there is a general definition of exact functors that restricts to the simple conditions that [[finite limit|finite (co)limits]] are preserved in the case that these exist.

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition

For $\kappa$ a [[regular cardinal]], an [[(∞,1)-functor]] $F : C \to D$ is **$\kappa$-right exact**, if, when modeled as a morphism of [[quasicategories]], for any [[right Kan fibration]] $D' \to D$ with $D'$ a $\kappa$-[[filtered (∞,1)-category]], the [[pullback]] $C' := C \times_D D'$ (in [[sSet]]) is also $\kappa$-filtered.

If $\kappa = \omega$ then we just say $F$ is **right exact**.

=--

This is [[Higher Topos Theory|HTT, def. 5.3.2.1]].

+-- {: .un_prop}
###### Proposition

If $C$ has $\kappa$-small [[colimit]]s, then $F$ is $\kappa$-right exact precisely if it preserves these $\kappa$-small colimits.

So in particular if $C$ has all [[finite (infinity,1)-limit|finite colimits]], then $F$ is right exact precisely if it preserves these.

=--

This is  [[Higher Topos Theory|HTT, prop. 5.3.2.9]].

## Properties

+-- {: .un_prop}
###### Proposition

1. $\kappa$-right exact $(\infty,1)$-functors are closed under composition.

1. Every [[(∞,1)-equivalence]] is $\kappa$-right exact.

1. An $(\infty,1)$-functor equivalent (in the [[(∞,1)-category of (∞,1)-functors]]) to a $\kappa$-right exact one is itsels $\kappa$-right exact.

=--

This is [[Higher Topos Theory|HTT, prop. 5.3.2.4]].

## Related concepts

* [[excisive (∞,1)-functor]]

## References

Section 5.3.2 of 

* [[Jacob Lurie]], _[[Higher Topos Theory]]_ 

[[!redirects exact (∞,1)-functor]]

[[!redirects exact (infinity,1)-functors]]
[[!redirects exact (∞,1)-functors]]

[[!redirects left exact (∞,1)-functor]]
[[!redirects left exact (infinity,1)-functor]]

[[!redirects left exact (infinity,1)-functors]]
[[!redirects left exact (∞,1)-functors]]

[[!redirects right exact (∞,1)-functor]]
[[!redirects right exact (infinity,1)-functor]]

[[!redirects right exact (infinity,1)-functors]]
[[!redirects right exact (∞,1)-functors]]