pages/4112.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Cantor space, named after [[Georg Cantor]], is a famous [[space]].  Cantor studied it primarily as a [[subspace]] of the [[real line]], but it is also important as a space in its own right.


## Definition

Recall that a __[[binary digit]]__ is either $0$ or $1$; the [[set]] (or [[discrete space]]) of binary digits is the [[Boolean domain]] $\mathbb{B}$.

A __point__ in Cantor space is an [[infinite sequence]] of binary digits.  Accordingly, Cantor space may be denoted $\mathbb{B}^{\mathbb{N}}$, since its set of points is a [[function set]].

An __open__ in Cantor space is a collection $G$ of [[list|finite sequences]] of binary digits (that is a [[subset]] of the [[free monoid]] $\mathbb{B}^*$) such that:

*  If $u \in G$ and $v$ is an extension of $u$ (that is $u$ with possibly additional digits added to the end), then $v \in G$;

*  If $u:0 \in G$ and $u:1 \in G$ (where $u:i$ is the immediate extension of $u$ by the digit $i$), then $u \in G$.

A point $\alpha$ __belongs__ to an open $G$ if, for some $u$ in $G$, $\alpha$ is an extension of $u$.


### What kind of space?

Traditionally, Cantor space is understood as a [[topological space]].  We start with the points, as defined above, then specify which sets of points are [[open subset|open]].  Although there are other ways to state which sets are open, we may define a set to be open if it is the set of points that belong to some open $G$ as defined above.

A newer approach is to understand Cantor space as a [[locale]].  Then we start with the opens and define an [[order]] relation on them to define a [[frame]].  In this case, the order relation is the obvious one, that $G \leq H$ if $G \subseteq H$ as subsets of $\mathbb{B}^*$.  Then the [[point of a locale|points]] come for free, and correspond precisely to the points as defined above.

In [[classical mathematics]], these two approaches are equivalent; a point is determined by its opens, and an open is determined by its points.  The theorem that a point is determined by its opens (so that Cantor space, as a topological space, is [[sober space|sober]]) is valid [[internalisation|internal]] to any [[pretopos]] with an [[exponential object|exponentiable]] [[natural numbers object]]; as such, it applies even in [[predicative mathematics|predicative]] and [[constructive mathematics|constructive]] mathematics.  However, the theorem that an open is determined by its points (so that Cantor space, as a locale, is [[spatial locale|topological]]) is equivalent to the [[fan theorem]]; it is true in some pretoposes and accepted by some schools of constructivism but false in other pretoposes and rejected, or even refuted, by other constructivists.

When the fan theorem is not valid, the localic approach is probably better; it allows more of the useful properties of Cantor space to hold.


### As a subspace

Cantor space is usually conceived of as a subspace of the [[real line]].  Pointwise, it is easy to define the [[embedding]] from $\mathbb{B}^{\mathbb{N}}$ into $\mathbb{R}$; we map the infinite sequence $\alpha$ to the [[real number]]
$$ \sum_{i=1}^{\infty} \frac { 2 \alpha_i } { 3^i } .$$
One then checks that this [[function]] is in fact an embedding.

From the localic perspective, a [[continuous map]] is given by a [[homomorphism]] of frames in the opposite direction.  Given an open $\sim$ in $\mathbb{R}$ (as a [[binary relation]] on [[rational numbers]], as described at [[locale of real numbers]]), this is mapped to the open $G$ in Cantor space such that $u \in G$ if and only if
$$ \sum_{i=1}^{len(u)} \frac { 2 u_i } { 3^i } \sim \sum_{i=1}^{len(u)} \frac { 2 u_i } { 3^i } + \frac 1 { 3^{-len(u)} } .$$
One then checks that this is an embedding.

+-- {: .query}
I should check this some day; for the moment, I am taking it on faith.  ---Toby
=--

In either case, the idea is:

*  A point of Cantor space corresponds to a number written in base $3$ with infinitely many digits, using only the digits $0$ and $2$; while

*  An open corresponds to a union of intervals, each of which is given by approximating a number in base $3$ to a finite number of digits, using only the digits $0$ and $2$.

One sometimes speaks of the __Cantor set__ to stress that one is considering Cantor space as a subspace of the real line.


## Properties

Cantor space, especially in its guise as a subspace of the real line, is quite famous; see [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cantor_set).  Here are some headline properties:

*  Cantor space is a [[compact Hausdorff space]].  (For the topological space, this statement is again equivalent to the [[fan theorem]]; for the locale, it holds regardless.)

*  Cantor space is [[connected space|totally disconnected]]. 

*  Cantor space is [[metric space|metrizable]], and every compact metrizable space is a [[quotient space]] of Cantor space.

*  As a subspace of $\mathbb{R}$, the Cantor set is [[perfect space|perfect]] and [[uncountable set|uncountable]] but of [[Lebesgue measure|Lebesgue]] [[null set|measure zero]].

*  The Cantor set is a precisely self-similar [[fractal]] with [[Hausdorff dimension]] $\log_3 2 \approx 0.631$. 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 
A space is [[homeomorphism|homeomorphic]] to Cantor space if and only if it is nonempty, compact, totally disconnected, metrizable, and perfect. 
=-- 

This result is sometimes called Brouwer's theorem. It can be seen from the perspective of [[Stone duality]], where the dual result is that any two [[countable set|countable]] [[atom|atomless]] [[Boolean algebras]] are [[isomorphism|isomorphic]]; this dual result can be proven by a [[back-and-forth argument]]. 

[[!redirects Cantor space]]
[[!redirects Cantor set]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 106740 Revision date: 2016-03-20 19:07:30 Page name: Cantor space Author: Todd Trimble IP address: 67.81.95.215

pages/4112.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Cantor space, named after [[Georg Cantor]], is a famous [[space]].  Cantor studied it primarily as a [[subspace]] of the [[real line]], but it is also important as a space in its own right.


## Definition

Recall that a __[[binary digit]]__ is either $0$ or $1$; the [[set]] (or [[discrete space]]) of binary digits is the [[Boolean domain]] $\mathbb{B}$.

A __point__ in Cantor space is an [[infinite sequence]] of binary digits.  Accordingly, Cantor space may be denoted $\mathbb{B}^{\mathbb{N}}$, since its set of points is a [[function set]].

An __open__ in Cantor space is a collection $G$ of [[list|finite sequences]] of binary digits (that is a [[subset]] of the [[free monoid]] $\mathbb{B}^*$) such that:

*  If $u \in G$ and $v$ is an extension of $u$ (that is $u$ with possibly additional digits added to the end), then $v \in G$;

*  If $u:0 \in G$ and $u:1 \in G$ (where $u:i$ is the immediate extension of $u$ by the digit $i$), then $u \in G$.

A point $\alpha$ __belongs__ to an open $G$ if, for some $u$ in $G$, $\alpha$ is an extension of $u$.


### What kind of space?

Traditionally, Cantor space is understood as a [[topological space]].  We start with the points, as defined above, then specify which sets of points are [[open subset|open]].  Although there are other ways to state which sets are open, we may define a set to be open if it is the set of points that belong to some open $G$ as defined above.

A newer approach is to understand Cantor space as a [[locale]].  Then we start with the opens and define an [[order]] relation on them to define a [[frame]].  In this case, the order relation is the obvious one, that $G \leq H$ if $G \subseteq H$ as subsets of $\mathbb{B}^*$.  Then the [[point of a locale|points]] come for free, and correspond precisely to the points as defined above.

In [[classical mathematics]], these two approaches are equivalent; a point is determined by its opens, and an open is determined by its points.  The theorem that a point is determined by its opens (so that Cantor space, as a topological space, is [[sober space|sober]]) is valid [[internalisation|internal]] to any [[pretopos]] with an [[exponential object|exponentiable]] [[natural numbers object]]; as such, it applies even in [[predicative mathematics|predicative]] and [[constructive mathematics|constructive]] mathematics.  However, the theorem that an open is determined by its points (so that Cantor space, as a locale, is [[spatial locale|topological]]) is equivalent to the [[fan theorem]]; it is true in some pretoposes and accepted by some schools of constructivism but false in other pretoposes and rejected, or even refuted, by other constructivists.

When the fan theorem is not valid, the localic approach is probably better; it allows more of the useful properties of Cantor space to hold.


### As a subspace

Cantor space is usually conceived of as a subspace of the [[real line]].  Pointwise, it is easy to define the [[embedding]] from $\mathbb{B}^{\mathbb{N}}$ into $\mathbb{R}$; we map the infinite sequence $\alpha$ to the [[real number]]
$$ \sum_{i=1}^{\infty} \frac { 2 \alpha_i } { 3^i } .$$
One then checks that this [[function]] is in fact an embedding.

From the localic perspective, a [[continuous map]] is given by a [[homomorphism]] of frames in the opposite direction.  Given an open $\sim$ in $\mathbb{R}$ (as a [[binary relation]] on [[rational numbers]], as described at [[locale of real numbers]]), this is mapped to the open $G$ in Cantor space such that $u \in G$ if and only if
$$ \sum_{i=1}^{len(u)} \frac { 2 u_i } { 3^i } \sim \sum_{i=1}^{len(u)} \frac { 2 u_i } { 3^i } + \frac 1 { 3^{-len(u)} } .$$
One then checks that this is an embedding.

+-- {: .query}
I should check this some day; for the moment, I am taking it on faith.  ---Toby
=--

In either case, the idea is:

*  A point of Cantor space corresponds to a number written in base $3$ with infinitely many digits, using only the digits $0$ and $2$; while

*  An open corresponds to a union of intervals, each of which is given by approximating a number in base $3$ to a finite number of digits, using only the digits $0$ and $2$.

One sometimes speaks of the __Cantor set__ to stress that one is considering Cantor space as a subspace of the real line.


## Properties

Cantor space, especially in its guise as a subspace of the real line, is quite famous; see [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cantor_set).  Here are some headline properties:

*  Cantor space is a [[compact Hausdorff space]].  (For the topological space, this statement is again equivalent to the [[fan theorem]]; for the locale, it holds regardless.)

*  Cantor space is [[connected space|totally disconnected]]. 

*  Cantor space is [[metric space|metrizable]], and every compact metrizable space is a [[quotient space]] of Cantor space.

*  As a subspace of $\mathbb{R}$, the Cantor set is [[perfect space|perfect]] and [[uncountable set|uncountable]] but of [[Lebesgue measure|Lebesgue]] [[null set|measure zero]].

*  The Cantor set is a precisely self-similar [[fractal]] with [[Hausdorff dimension]] $\log_3 2 \approx 0.631$. 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 
A space is [[homeomorphism|homeomorphic]] to Cantor space if and only if it is nonempty, compact, totally disconnected, metrizable, and perfect. 
=-- 

This result is sometimes called Brouwer's theorem. It can be seen from the perspective of [[Stone duality]], where the dual result is that any two [[countable set|countable]] [[atom|atomless]] [[Boolean algebras]] are [[isomorphism|isomorphic]]; this dual result can be proven by a [[back-and-forth argument]]. 

+-- {: .num_cor} 
###### Corollary 
The one-point compactification $\widebar{X}$ of a space $X$ that is second-countable locally compact Hausdorff, totally disconnected and perfect, is homeomorphic to Cantor space (provided $X$ is not itself compact). 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
$\widebar{X}$ is also second-countable, compact Hausdorff and therefore compact regular, and so by the [[Urysohn metrization theorem]] it is compact metrizable. The point $p$ at infinity is not isolated since we assume $X$ is not compact, so $\widebar{X}$ is perfect. If $V$ is any open neighborhood of $p$, so $V = \neg K$ for some compact $K$, then we claim there exists a clopen containing $K$; in that case $V$ contains a clopen whence $\{p\}$ is the quasi-component of $p$ (hence also the connected component since we're in a compact Hausdorff space). The claim follows from the argument [here](/nlab/show/compact+Hausdorff+rings+are+profinite#compopen): for each $x \in K$ there is a clopen contained in $\neg \{p\}$; finitely many of these clopens cover $K$, and the claim follows by considering their union. 
=-- 

It follows from this result that all such spaces $X$ are homeomorphic: they all have Cantor space as their one-point compactifications, and so they are all homeomorphic to the space obtained obtained by removing a single point from Cantor space. This applies for example to spaces obtained by removing a finite number $n \geq 1$ of points from Cantor space. 

[[!redirects Cantor space]]
[[!redirects Cantor set]]
