
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Topology
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A _partition of unity_ is a [[partition]] of the unit function on a [[topological space]] into a sum of continuous functions that are each non-zero only on small parts of the space.


## Definition

Let $X$ be a [[topological space]]. A (point finite) **partition of unity** on $X$ is a collection $\{u_j\}_{j \in J}$ of [[continuous functions]] $u_j \colon X \to [0,1]$, $j\in J$ to the [[closed interval]] with its [[Euclidean space|Euclidean]] [[metric topology]] such that

 1. For each $x\in X$, there is only a [[finite number]] of $j\in J$ such that $u_j(x) \neq 0$ (point finiteness condition);

 1. $\sum_{j \in J} u_j(x) = 1$ for all $x\in X$.


A partition of unity defines an [[open cover]] of $X$, consisting of the open sets $u_j^{-1}(0,1]$. Call this the **induced cover**.

Sometimes (rarely) the condition that $\{u_j\}_J$ is point finite is dropped. In this case we refer to a _non-point finite_ partition of unity (see [[red herring principle]]). In this case for each point of $X$ at most countably-many of the functions $u_j$ are non-zero, and we have to interpret the sum in 1. above as being a [[convergence|convergent]] infinite [[series]].

Given a [[cover]] $\mathcal{U} = \{U_j\}_{j\in J}$ of a [[topological space]] ([[open cover]] or closed or neither), the partition of unity $\{u_j\}_J$ is **subordinate** to $\mathcal{U}$ if for all $j\in J$,
$$
\overline{u_j^{-1}(0,1]} \subset U_j.
$$

What this means is that the open sets $u_j^{-1}(0,1]$ form an open cover _refining_ the cover $\mathcal{U}$.


## Properties

### Existence on paracompact spaces

+-- {: .num_prop #ParacompactHausdorffEquivalentToexistenceOfParititionsOfUnity}
###### Proposition
**([[paracompact Hausdorff spaces equivalently admit subordinate partitions of unity]])**

Assuming the [[axiom of choice]] then:

Let $(X,\tau)$ be a [[topological space]]. Then the following are equivalent:

1. $(X,\tau)$ is a [[paracompact Hausdorff space]].

1. Every [[open cover]] of $(X,\tau)$ admits a subordinate partition of unity.

=--




Similarly [[normal spaces]] are equivalently those such that every [[locally finite cover]] has a subordinate partition of unity (reference Bourbaki, Topology Generale - find this!)

Paracompact [[smooth manifolds]] have _smooth_ partitions of unity subordinate to any open cover (this follows from the existence of a smooth [[bump function]] on $[-1,1]$). It is not true, however, that [[analytic manifolds]] have analytic partitions of unity - the aforementioned [[bump function]] is smooth but not analytic:

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Let $X$ be a paracompact [[smooth manifold]]. Then every [[open cover]] $\{U_i \subset X\}_{i \in I}$ has a partition of unity by functions $\{\phi_i \colon U_i \to \mathbb{R}\}_{i \in I}$ which are _[[smooth functions]]_.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Let $\{\mathbb{R}^n  \underoverset{\simeq}{\phi_j X}{\to}\}_{j \in J}$ be an [[atlas]] for the smooth manifold. Then by definition, for each point $x \in X$ there is $i \in I$ and $j \in J$ such that 

$$
  x \in U_i \cap Im(\phi_j)
  \,.
$$

By the nature of the [[subspace topology]], this intersection is still an open subset of $Im(\phi_j) \simeq \mathbb{R}^n$. Therefore by the nature of the [[metric topology]] there exists a [[positive number|positive]] [[real number]] $\epsilon_{x}$ such that the [[open ball]] $B^\circ_x(\epsilon_x) \subset U_i \cap Im(\phi_j)$ is an open neighbourhood of $x$ contained in $U_i$.

Let 

$$
  \left\{
     B^\circ_x(\epsilon_x)
     \subset X
  \right\}_{x \in X}
$$

be the collection of choices of such open balls, around each point of the manifold. This is an [[open cover]] which [[refinement|refines]] the original open cover. By [[paracompact topological space|paracompactness]], there exists a [[locally finite cover|locally finite]] subcover, hence a [[subset]] of points $S \subset X$ such that

$$  
  \left\{
     B^\circ_s(\epsilon_s)
     \subset
     X
  \right\}_{s \in S \subset X}
$$

is a locally finite open cover of $X$.

(...)





=--


### From a non-point finite partition of unity to a partition of unity

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A collection of functions $\mathcal{U} = \{u_i : X \to [0,1]\}$ such that every $x\in X$ is in the support of some $u_i$. Then $\mathcal{U}$ is called _locally finite_ if the cover $u_i^{-1}(0,1]$ (i.e. the induced cover) is [[locally finite cover|locally finite]].
=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition
(Mather, 1965)

Let $\{u_i\}_J$ be a non-point finite partition of unity. Then there is a locally finite partition of unity $\{v_i\}_{i\in J}$ such that the induced cover of the latter is a refinement of the induced cover of the former.
=--

(For a proof, see p.354 of Dold's Lectures on algebraic topology. [Google books link to page 354](https://books.google.com.au/books?id=4AmzD9XhGDkC&lpg=PA354&vq=locally%20finite%20oartition%20unity&pg=PA354#v=onepage&q&f=false), which may or may not be visible)

This implies that (loc. finite) [[numerable covers]] are cofinal in induced covers arising from collections of functions as in the definition. In particular, given the [[Milnor classifying space]] $\mathcal{B}^M G$ of a [[topological group]] $G$, which comes with a countable family of 'coordinate functions' $\mathcal{B}^M G \to [0,1]$, has a numerable cover. This is shown by Dold to be a trivialising cover for the universal bundle constructed by Milnor, and so the universal bundle is [[numerable bundle|numerable]].


## Applications 

### Maps to geometric realizations

Partitions of unity can be used in constructing maps from spaces to [[geometric realization]]s of [[simplicial spaces]] (incl. simplicial sets) - for example a [[classifying map]] for a $G$-[[bundle]] where $G$ is a [[Lie group]].


### Coboundaries for Cech cocycles {#CechCoboundaries}

Partitions of unity can be used to give explicit coboundaries for the cocycles of the complex of functions on a cover.

Let $\{U_i \to X\}$ be a [[open cover]] and $\{\rho_i \in C(X,\mathbb{R})\}$ a collection of functions with

* $(x not \in U_i) \Rightarrow \rho_i(x) = 0$

* $\sum_i \rho_i = const_1$.

Write $C(\{U_i\}) : \Delta^{op} \to Top$ for the [[Cech nerve]] of the cover and $C(C(\{U_i\}), \mathbb{R})$ for the [[cosimplicial ring]] of functions on this [[simplicial object|simplicial]] topological space; and $(C_\bullet(C(\{U_i\}), \mathbb{R}), \delta)$ for the corresponding (normalized) [[Moore complex|cochain complex]]: its differential is the alternating sum of the pullbacks of functions along the face maps, i.e. along the restriction maps

$$
  \delta = \sum_k (-1)^k \delta_{k}^*
  \,.
$$

For instance for $f = \{f_{i_1, i_2, \cdots, i_n} \in C(U_{i_1} \cap \cdots \cap U_{i_{n+1}})\}$ a collection of functions in degree $n$, we have

$$
  (\delta f)_{i_0 \cdots i_n i_{n+1}} =
  \sum_{k = 0}^{n+1} (-1)^k f_{i_0 \cdots i_{k-1} i_{k+1} \cdots i_{n+1}}
  \,.
$$ 

This cochain complex has vanishing [[cochain cohomology]] in positive degree. We can explicitly construct corresponding coboundaries using the partion of unity:

assume that with the above notation $f$ is a cocycle in positive degree, in that $\delta f  = 0$. Then define the $(n-1)$-cochain

$$
  \lambda_{i_1 \cdots i_n}
  :=
  \sum_{i_0} \rho_{i_0} f_{i_0 i_1 \cdots i_n}
  \,.
$$

Here in the summands on the right the product is defined on $U_{i_0} \cap U_{i_1} \cap \cdots \cap U_{i_n}$ and extended as 0 to all of $U_{i_1} \cap \cdots \cap U_{i_n}$.

With this definition we have

$$
  \delta \lambda = f
  \,.
$$

To see this we compute

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    (\delta \lambda)_{i_1 \cdots i_{n+1}}
    & :=
    \sum_{i_0} \rho_{i_0} \sum_{k=1}^n (-1)^k f_{i_0 i_1 \cdots i_{k-1} i_{k+1} \cdots i_{n+1}}
    \\
    & =
    \pm 
    \sum_{i_0} \rho_{i_0} 
    f_{i_1 \cdots i_{n+1}}
    \\
    & = f_{i_1 \cdots i_{n+1}}
  \end{aligned}
  \,,
$$

where in the second step we used the condition $\delta f = 0$ and in the last step we used the property of the partition of unity.

This construction is used a lot in [[Cech cohomology]]. For instance it can be used to show in Chech cocycles that every [[principal bundle]] admits a [[connection on a bundle]] (see there for the details).


## References

* [[Albrecht Dold]], _Partitions of unity in the theory of fibrations_, Ann. of Math. 78. (1963), 223-255.

* [[Albrecht Dold]], _Lectures on algebraic topology_, Springer Classics in Mathematics (1980), p.354.

* M. Mather, _Paracompactness and partitions of unity_, PhD thesis, Cambridge (1965).

Discussion of partitions of unity in [[constructive mathematics]] is in

* {#Waaldijk96} [[Frank Waaldijk]], section 3.1 of _modern intuitionistic topology_, 1996 ([pdf](http://www.fwaaldijk.nl/modern%20intuitionistic%20topology.pdf))


[[!redirects partition of unity]]
[[!redirects partitions of unity]]
[[!redirects Partition of unity]]
[[!redirects Partitions of unity]]
