
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

What is called _perturbative quantum field theory_ (pQFT) is [[quantum field theory]] where the [[interaction]] (between [[field (physics)|fields]]/[[particles]]) is treated as a tiny [[perturbation]] of the "[[free field theory]]", where no interaction is assumed to takes place ("[[perturbation theory]]"). 

Hence pQFT studies the _[[infinitesimal neighbourhood]]_ (also called the _[[formal neighbourhood]]_) of [[free quantum field theories]] in the space of all quantum field theories. Mathematically this means that the resulting [[quantum observables]] are [[formal power series]] in the [[coupling constant]]  $g$ which measures the strength of the interaction (as well as in _[[Planck's constant]]_, which measures the general strength of [[quantum physics|quantum]]9. This distribuishes perturbative quantum field theory from [[non-pertutbative quantum field theory]], where the algebras of [[quantum observables]] are supposed to be not formal power series algebras, but [[C*-algebras]].

The key object of perturbative QFT is the perturbative _[[scattering matrix]]_ which expresses, as a [[formal power series]] in the ratio of the [[coupling constant]] over [[Planck's constant]], the [[probability amplitude]] of [[scattering]] processes, namely of processes where [[free field theory|free fields]] in a certain [[quantum state|state]] come in from the far past, interact and hence scatter off each other, and then go off in some other [[quantum state]] into the far future. The [[scattering cross sections]] thus defined are the quantities which may be directly measured in scattering [[experiments]], such as the [[LHC]] accelerator.

The perturbative [[S-matrix]] turns out to have an expression as a sum over separate [[scattering amplitudes]] for elementary processes labeled by _[[Feynman diagrams]]_, each of which depicts one specific way for fields ([[particles]]) to interact with each other. That the full S-matrix is the sum over all amplitudes for all these possible scattering processes, the _[[Feynman perturbation series]]_, is an incarnation of the informal heuristic of the [[path integral]] and the [[superposition principle]] in [[quantum physics]], which says that the [[probability amplitude]] for a specific outcome is the sum over the probability amplitudes of all the possible processes that can contribute to this outcome. 

For all interesting interacting [[theory (physics)|theories]], such as [[quantum electrodynamics]] and [[quantum chromodynamics]], this [[scattering matrix]] [[formal power series]] necessarily has _vanishing_ [[radius of convergence]] ([Dyson 52](perturbation+theory#Dyson52)). It is regarded as an [[asymptotic series]] whose first couple of terms in this [[Feynman perturbation series]] sum to a good approximation of the actual value to be computed. Indeed, the sum of the first few loop orders in the [[S-matrix]] for  [[QED]] and [[QCD]] in the [[standard model of particle physics]] turns out to be in agreement with [[experiment]] to high precision. 

(There are however [[non-perturbative effects]] which are not captured in perturbatin theory (such as [[instantons in QCD]]). In [[resurgence theory]] one tries to identify these from the nature of the perturbation series.)

Historically, perturbative quantum field theory, as first conceived by [[Tomonaga]], [[Schwinger]], [[Feynman]] and [Dyson 49](#Dyson49) had been notorious for the mysterious nature of its mathematical principles ("divergencies"). A mathematically rigorous formulation of [[renormalization]] ("removal of UV-divergencies") in perturbative quantum field theory on [[Minkowski spacetime]] was established by [Epstein-Glaser 73](#EpsteinGlaser73), based on [Bogoliubov-Shirkov 59](#BogoliubovShirkov59) and [Stückelberg 51](#Stueckelberg51)), now known as _[[causal perturbation theory]]_. The correct definition of the [[adiabatic switching|adiabatic limit]] ("removal of IR divergencies") was understood already by [Il'in-Slavnov 78](#IlinSlavnov78) and eventually developed by [Brunetti-DütschFredenhagen 09](#BrunettiDuetschFredenhagen09), now called _[[perturbative algebraic quantum field theory]]_. 

A key step in the construction of perturbative quantum field theory is the _[[renormalization]]_ of the point interactions. This is because given

1. a [[local Lagrangian density]] defining the nature of the [[field (physics)|fields]] and their [[interactions]], 

1. a [[vacuum state]] (generally: [[Hadamard state]]) that defines the [[free field theory|free]] [[quantum field theory]] to be perturbed about

it turns that the construction of the perturbative [[S-matrix]] (the [[Feynman perturbation series]]) that defines the interacting perturbative field theory still involves at each order a finite-dimensional space of choices to be made. Physically these are the specification of further high energy interactions not seen in the original [[local Lagrangian density]], mathematically this is the choice of extending the [[time-ordered product]] of the interaction, which is an [[operator-valued distribution]], to the locus of coinciding interaction points, in the sense of [[extensions of distributions]].


The prescription for the construction of the perturbative [[S-matrix]] in [[causal perturbation theory]] and the perturbative [[local net of quantum observables]] (see [here](S-matrix#CausalLocality)) used to be somewhat ad-hoc, albeit well motivated by [[analogy]] with [[quantum mechanics]] and justified by it producing, rigorousy, the [[Feynman perturbation series]] of the [[S-matrix]] ([Keller 10 (IV.12)](#Keller10)).

Historically the [[Feynman perturbation series]] was motivated from intuition about the would-be [[path integral]], and this is still a popular point of view, albeit its lack of rigorous formulation. One may understand the axiomatics on the [[S-matrix]] in [[causal perturbation theory]] as defining the result of the perturbative path integral without actually doing an integration over field configurations.

But while [[path integral quantization]] for perturbative quantum field theory remains elusive, it has been shown that the (re-)normalized [[perturbative quantum field theory]] thus constructed via [[causal perturbation theory]] is, at least under favorable circumstances, equivalently the ([[Fedosov deformation quantization|Fedosov]]) [[formal deformation quantization]] of the [[covariant phase space]] induced by the given interacting [[Lagrangian density]] ([Collini 16](#Collini16)). This identifies the [[renormalization]] freedom with the usual freedom in choosing [[formal deformation quantization]]. 

This also suggest that the construction of the full [[non-perturbative quantum field theory]] ought to be given by a [[strict deformation quantization]] of the [[covariant phase space]]. But presently no example of such for non-trivial interaction in [[spacetime]] [[dimension]] $\geq 4$ is known.
In particular the [[phenomenology|phenomenologically]] interesting case of a complete construction of interacting field theories on 4-dimensional spacetimes is presently unknown. For the case of [[Yang-Mills theory]] this open problem is one of the "Millenium Problems" (see at _[[quantization of Yang-Mills theory]]_).


## Properties

* [[main theorem of perturbative renormalization theory]]

## Related concepts

* [[renormalization]]

* [[causal perturbation theory]]

* [[non-perturbative field theory]]

## References

The original informal conception of the theory is due to [[Tomonaga]], [[Schwinger]], [[Feynman]] and [[Dyson]]:

* {#Dyson49} [[Freeman Dyson]], _The raditation theories of Tomonaga, Schwinger and Feynman_, Phys. Rev. 75, 486, 1949 ([pdf](http://web.ihep.su/dbserv/compas/src/dyson49b/eng.pdf))

The rigorous formulation of renormalized perturbative quantum field theory in terms of [[causal perturbation theory]] was first accomplished in 

* {#EpsteinGlaser73} [[Henri Epstein]], [[Vladimir Glaser]], _[[The Role of locality in perturbation theory]]_, Annales Poincaré Phys. Theor. A 19 (1973) 211 ([Numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=AIHPA_1973__19_3_211_0 ))

with precursors in

* {#Stueckelberg49} [[Ernst Stückelberg]], D. Rivier, Helv. Phys. Acta, 22 (1949) 215. 

* {#Stueckelberg51} [[Ernst Stückelberg]], J. Green, Helv. Phys. Acta, 24 (1951) 153.

* [[Ernst Stückelberg]], A. Peterman, , _La normalisation des constants dans la theorie des quanta_, Helv. Phys. Acta 26, 499 (1953); 

* {#BogoliubovShirkov59} [[Nikolay Bogoliubov]], [[Dmitry Shirkov]], _Introduction to the Theory of Quantized Fields_, New York (1959)

Concrete examples have been spelled out for [[quantum electrodynamics]] in

* {#Scharf95} [[Günter Scharf]], _[[Finite Quantum Electrodynamics -- The Causal Approach]]_, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1995, 2nd edition

and for [[Yang-Mills theory]], [[quantum chromodynamics]] and perturbative [[quantum gravity]] in

* {#Scharf01} [[Günter Scharf]], _[[Quantum Gauge Theories -- A True Ghost Story]]_, Wiley 2001

The treatment of the IR-divergencies by [[perturbative algebraic quantum field theory]] was first suggested in

* {#IlinSlavnov78} V. A. Il’in and D. S. Slavnov, _Observable algebras in the S-matrix approach_, Theor. Math. Phys. 36 (1978) 32 ([spire](http://inspirehep.net/record/135575), [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01035870))

and then developed in

* {#BrunettiDuetschFredenhagen09} [[Romeo Brunetti]], [[Michael Dütsch]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], _Perturbative Algebraic Quantum Field Theory and the Renormalization Groups_, Adv. Theor. Math. Physics 13 (2009), 1541-1599 ([arXiv:0901.2038](http://arxiv.org/abs/0901.2038))


The construction of [[causal perturbation theory]] has been shown to be equivalent to the ([[Fedosov  deformation quantization|Fedosov]]) [[formal deformation quantization]] of the [[covariant phase space]] of the field theory in

* {#Collini16} [[Giovanni Collini]], _Fedosov Quantization and Perturbative Quantum Field Theory_ ([arXiv:1603.09626](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09626))


For more see the references at _[[perturbative algebraic quantum field theory]]_.

The relation of the construction via [[causal perturbation theory]] to the [[Feynman perturbation series]] in terms of [[Feynman diagrams]] was understood in 

* {#GarciaBondiaLazzarini00} J.M. Gracia-Bondia, S. Lazzarini, _Connes-Kreimer-Epstein-Glaser Renormalization_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0006106](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0006106))

* {#Keller10} [[Kai Keller]], chapter IV of _Dimensional Regularization in Position Space and a Forest Formula for Regularized Epstein-Glaser Renormalization_, PhD thesis ([arXxiv:1006.2148](https://arxiv.org/abs/1006.2148))

* {#DuetschFredenhagenKellerRejzner14} [[Michael Dütsch]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], [[Kai Keller]], [[Katarzyna Rejzner]], _Dimensional Regularization in Position Space, and a Forest Formula for Epstein-Glaser Renormalization_, J. Math. Phy.
55(12), 122303 (2014) ([arXiv:1311.5424](https://arxiv.org/abs/1311.5424))




[[!redirects perturbative field theory]]

[[!redirects perturbative quantum field theories]]
