
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A _bimonoidal category_ is a [[category]] equipped with two [[monoidal category]] structure $\otimes$ (in the role of the [[tensor product]]) and $\oplus$ (in the role of the [[direct sum]]) such that $\otimes$ [[distributivity law|distributes]] over $\oplus$ up to [[coherence law|coherent]] [[natural isomorphism]].

This may be thought of as a natural [[categorification]] of the notion of [[rig]] in the way that the notion of [[monoidal category]] is the categorification of the notion of [[monoid]].

## Definition

A **bimonoidal category** is a [[category]] $R$ with two structures $(R,\otimes, 1)$ and $(R.\oplus, 0)$ of a [[monoidal category]], which satisfy a distributivity law up to natural isomorphism among each, paralleling that for addition and multiplication in a [[rig]].

## Properties

### Strictification

The notion of a [[bipermutative category]] is a strictification of the notion of [[symmetric monoidal category|symmetric]] bimonidal categories. 

Every symmetric bimonoidal category is equivalent to a bipermutative category ([May, prop. VI 3.5]). 

Every bimonoidal category is equivalent to a strict bimonoidal category ([Guillou, theorem 1.2](#Guillou)).

## Examples

* [[Set]] is bimonoidal under [[disjoint union]] and [[cartesian product]].

* [[Ab]], $R$[[Mod]], [[Vect]] are bimonoidal under [[direct sum]] and [[tensor product of abelian groups]]/[[tensor product of modules]].

## Related entries

* [[K-theory of a bipermutative category]]

* [[BDR 2-vector bundle]].


## References

The [[coherence law|coherence]] for the [[distributivity law]] in bimonoidal categories has been given in

* M. Laplaza, _Coherence for distributivity_, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 281, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1972, pp. 29-72.

* G. Kelly, _Coherence theorems for lax algebras and distributive laws_, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 420, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1974, pp. 281-375.

where these categories are called _ring categories_. Discussion with an eye towers the [[K-theory of a bipermutative category]] is in

* [[Peter May]], _$E_\infty$ Ring Spaces and $E_\infty$ Ring spectra_, Springer lectures notes in mathematics, Vol. 533, (1977) ([pdf](http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/BOOKS/e_infty.pdf)) chaper VI
 {#May}

* Bertrand Guillou, _Strictification of categories weakly enriched in symmetric monoidal categories, arXiv:0909.5270
 {#Guillou}


* Angélica Osorno, _Spectra associated to symmetric monoidal bicategories_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/1005.2227))

[[!redirects bimonoidal categories]]