
#Idea#

There are different ways to define a differential volume element on a smooth [[manifold]]. Some of these definitions can be carried over to supergeometry, others cannot. The possibly most familiar way of talking about differential volume elements, in terms of top-degree differential forms, does _not_ carry over to [[supermanifold]]s.



###No top-degree forms in supergeometry###

In supergeometry the notion of _top-degree form_ does not in general make sense, since there are no top-degree wedge powers of "odd 1-forms": if for instance $\theta_1$ and $\theta_2$ are odd functions on some supermanifold and $d \theta_1$ and $d \theta_2$ are their differential 1-forms, then the wedge product of these is symmetric in that
$$
  d\theta_1 \wedge d \theta_2 = + 
  d\theta_2 \wedge d \theta_1
  \,.
$$
+-- {: .query}
_Question:_ Okay, but what is the _differential $d\theta_1$ of an odd co-ordinate function_? How are we to think of it geometrically? Does it measure a rate of change of something? (Bruce Bartlett)

_Answer:_ See [[superdifferential form]]. (Urs Schreiber)
=--
Notice the plus sign on the right.
You can think of this plus sign as being the product of one minus sign for interchanging $\theta_1$ and $\theta_2$, and another minus sign for interchanging the two differentials.

Accordingly, the wedge product of the differential of an odd function $\theta$ with itself does not in general vanish:
$$
  (d \theta \wedge d\theta = 0)
  \Leftrightarrow
  (\theta = 0)
  \,.
$$

On the cartesian supermanifold $\mathbb{R}^{n|m}$ with canonical even coordinate functions $\{x^i\}_1^n$ and canonical odd coordinate functions $\{\theta^j\}_1^m$ the differential form which one would want to regard as the canonical volume form is
$$
  \omega :=
  d x^1 \wedge \cdots \wedge dx^n \wedge 
  d\theta^1 \wedge \cdots \wedge d\theta^m
  \,.
$$
Due to the above, this is not a _top_ form, since for instance
$$
  \omega \wedge d\theta^1 \neq 0
  \,.
$$

But this example also indicates the solution: apparently for integration it is not really essential that a form is a top power, what is rather essential is that it is, locally, the wedge product of a _basis_ of 1-forms. This perspective then does lead to a sensible definition of volume forms (and more generally "integrable forms") on supermanifolds, described below.

###Solution: ###

Therefore the na&iuml;ve identification of differential volume measures with top degree forms has to be refined. The idea is to characterize a volume form by other means, in particular as an equivalence class of choices of bases for the space of 1-forms, and then to define **integrable forms** to be pairs consisting of such a generalized volume form and a **multivector**: this pair is supposed to represent the differential form one would obtain could one contract the multivector with the volume form, as in ordinary differential geometry.

The definition of integration of integrable forms in supergeometry in terms of multivectorfields leads, in the case that the supermanifold in an [[NQ-supermanifold]] to the [[BV theory|BV formalism]].

#Details#

A summary of the standard lore is here: 

Urs Schreiber, [_Integration over supermanifolds_](http://www.math.uni-hamburg.de/home/schreiber/sin.pdf)