
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Quantum field theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functorial quantum field theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A _2-dimensional TQFT_ is a [[TQFT|topological quantum field theory]] on [[cobordism]]s of dimension 2. 

If one understands this as an [[FQFT]]s with values in [[Vect]], then the central classification theorem of 2d TQFTs states that they induce the structure of a commutative [[Frobenius algebra]] on the vector space associated to the circle, and that this establishes an equivalence between 2d QFTs and Frobenius algebras. An analogous result holds for open-closed 2d TQFTs, where codimension 1 manifolds are also allowed to contain [[interval]]s.



## Filtrations of the moduli space of surfaces {#FiltrationOfModuliSpace}

The following study of the behaviour of 2-dimensional TQFTs in terms of the [[topology]] of the [[moduli space]]s of marked hyperbolic surfaces is due to [[Ezra Getzler]]. It provides a powerful way to read off various classification results for 2d QFTs from the [[homotopy group]]s of the corresponding [[modular operad]].

### $A_\infty$-monoid objects

Let  $Core$([[FinSet]]) be the [[core]] of the [[category]] of finite sets.
Under union of sets this is a [[symmetric monoidal category]]. Then for 
$C$ any [[monoidal category]], a [[symmetric monoidal functor]]

$$
 \Phi : Core(FinSet) \to C
$$ 

is a commutative [[monoid]] in $C$.

Let now $C$ be a [[category with weak equivalences]], then we can speak of a lax symmetric opmonoidal functor

$$
  \Phi : Core(FinSet) \to C
$$

if the structure maps

$$
  \Phi(n+m) \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} \Phi(m) \otimes \Phi(n)
$$

$$
  \phi(m) \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} \Phi(1)^{\otimes m}
$$

are weak equivalences. 

Segal called these "$\Delta$-objects". Since [[Carlos Simpson]] they are called
[[Segal object]]s. 

There is also [[Jim Stasheff]]'s notion of an [[A-infinity algebra]], given in terms
of [[associahedra]] $K_n$, which are $(n-2)$-dimensional [[polytope]]s.

There is naturally a filtration on these guys with 

$$
  F_0 K_n \subset F_1 K_n \subset \cdots
  \,,
$$

where $F_0 K_n$ is the set of vertices, $F_1 K_n$ the set of edges, etc.

The collection

$$
  \{
    S_\bullet(K_n)
  \}
$$

of simplicial realizations of the $K_n$ form an [[sSet]]-[[operad]] $P$.

For $X$ a [[simplicial category]] that is symmetric monoidal, a 
$P$-[[algebra over an operad]] $X$ in $C$ is an $A_\infty$-monoid object

$$
  S_\bullet(K_n) \to C_\bullet(X^{\otimes n}, X)
$$

[[Saunders MacLane|MacLane]]'s [[coherence theorem]] says or uses that if $C$ is an [[n-category]],
we may replace $K_m$ here by the $n$-filtration $F_n K_m$.


### Closed 2d quantum field theory

#### Compactified moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces

Let 

$$
  (\Sigma, (z_1, \cdots, z_n))
$$

be a [[compact space|compact]] [[orientation|oriented]] surface
with $n$ distinct marked points. Write

$$
  \mathcal{H}(\Sigma, (z_1, \cdots, z_n))
$$

for the [[moduli space]] of [[hyperbolic metric]]s with cusps at the $(z_i)$.

We have

$$
  M(\Sigma, \vec z)
  =
  \mathcal{H}(\Sigma, \vec z)/Diff_+(\Sigma, \vec z)
$$

and

$$
  M_{g,n} = \Tau_{g,n} / \Gamma^ng
  \,,
$$

where $\Tau_{g,n}$ is the [[Teichm端ller space]] and $\Gamma$ the [[mapping class group]].

Here we can assume that the [[Euler characteristic]] $\chi(\Sigma without \{z_i\}) \lt 0$
because otherwise this moduli space is empty.


#### Fenchel-Nielson coordinates on moduli space

We want to parameterize Teichm端ller space by cutting surfaces into pieces with 
geodesic boundaries and [[Euler characteristic]] $\xi = -1$. These building blocks 
(of hyperbolic 2d geometry) are precisely

* the 3-holed sphere;

* the 2-holed cusp;

* the 1-holed 2-cusp;

* the 3-cusp

Each surface of [[genus]] $g$ with $n$ marked points will have

* $2g - 2 + n$ generalized pants;

* $3 g - 3 + n$ closed curves.


The boundary lengths $\ell_i \in \mathbb{R}_+$ and twists 
$t_i \in \mathbb{R}$  of these pieces 
for 

$$
  1 \leq i \leq 3g-3+n
$$

constitute the [[Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates]] on 
[[Teichm端ller space]] $\Tau$.

Also use $\theta_i := t_i/\ell_i \in \mathbb{R}/\mathbb{Z}$

This constitutes is a real analytic [[atlas]] of Teichm端ller space. On $M$ this 
reduces to coordinates $t_i \in \mathbb{R}/{\ell_i \mathbb{Z}}$, and these
constitute a real analytic atlas of moduli space.

Allow the lengths $\ell_i$ to go to 0, but keep the angles $\theta_i$.
The resulting space is a real analytic [[manifold with corners]]
$\hat \Tau$ (due to [[Bill Harvey]]) and this constitutes a Borel-Serre
[[bordification]] of $\Tau$.

The [[mapping class group]] $\Gamma$ still acts on $\hat \Tau$ and the 
quotient $\hat M$ is an [[orbifold]] with corners, inside which still sits 
our moduli space $M$.

Kimura-Stasheff-Voronov: add a choice of 
directions at each nodal point in $\Sigma$. This removes
all automorphisms and hence we no longer have to deal with an [[orbifold]].

This yields the [[classifying stack]] $\mathcal{P}_{g,n}$ for $\Gamma_{g,n}$

Then the collection

$$
  \{
    \mathcal{P}_{g,n}
  \}
$$

is a [[modular operad]]: the operad that describes gluing of marked surfaces at
marked points together with the informaiton on how to glue marked points of a single
surface to each other.

A 2-dimensional closed [[TQFT]] is an [[algebra over an operad]] over this in 
a simplicial category, in the above sense.

This involves either the [[de Rham complex]] on $\mathcal{P}_{g,n}$ or
$S_\bullet(\mathcal{P}_{g,n})$.


Let

$$
  F_k \mathcal{P}_{g,n}
  := 
  \left\{
    [\Sigma] |
    ...
  \right\}
$$

where $\Sigma$ has $\geq 2g-2+n-k$ spheres as components (after cutting along zero-length
closed curves).

So for instance

* $F_0 \mathcal{P}_{g,n}$ is the pants-decomposition;

* $F_1 \mathcal{P}_{g,n}$ is decompositions into pants and one piece being the
  result of either gluing two pants to each other or of gluing two circles 
  of a single pant to each other.
  
  This $F_1 ..$ is a connected space, due to a theorem by Hatcher-Thurston. 
**Notice** This is equivalent to the familiar statement that a closed 2d TFT is
a commutative [[Frobenius algebra]].

* $F_2 \mathcal{P}_{g,n} $  is the decomposition into pieces as before
  together with one two-holed torus or one five-holed sphere.
  
  This space has the space [[fundamental group]] as $\mathcal{P}_{g,n}$.
  
  This is equivalent to the theorem by Moore and Seiberg about categorified
  2-d TFT.
  
+-- {: .un_theorem}
###### Theorem
([[Ezra Getzler]])

The inclusion

$$
  F_k \mathcal{P}_{g,n} \hookrightarrow \mathcal{P}_{g,n}
$$

is $k$-[[connected]].

Here a map $X\to Y$ is $k$-connected if

* $\pi_0(X) \to \pi_0(Y)$ is surjective;

* $\pi_i(X,x) \to \pi_i(Y,f(x))$ is a bijection for $i \lt k$ and surjective $i = k$.

This means precisely that the [[mapping cone]] is $k$-connected.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof


Use the cellular decomposition of moduli space $\mathcal{M}_{g,1}$
following Mumford, Thurston, Harer, Woeditch-Epstein, Penner.

=--


Some other versions of this:

$$
  F_k \Tau_{g,n} \to \Tau_{g,n}
$$

is $k$-connected. 

One can also use [[Deligne-Mumford compactification]]s

$$
  F_k \bar \mathcal{M}_{g,n} \to \bar \mathcal{M}_{g,n}
$$

and this is also $k$-connected.


### Open-closed case

...

## Related concepts

* [[TQFT]]

  * **2d TQFT**

    * [[2d Chern-Simons theory]]

    * [[TCFT]]

      * [[A-model]], [[B-model]]

    * [[Landau-Ginzburg model]]

    * [[Levin-Wen model]]

  * [[3d TQFT]]

  * [[4d TQFT]]

## References

The classification result for open-closed 2d TQFTs was famously announced and sketched in 

* [[Greg Moore]], [[Graeme Segal]], _Lectures on branes, K-theory and RR charges, Clay Math Institute Lecture Notes (2002), _ ([web](http://www.physics.rutgers.edu/~gmoore/clay1/clay1.html))

A standard textbook is

* [[Joachim Kock]], _Frobenius algebras and 2D topological quantum field theory_ ([web](http://mat.uab.cat/~kock/TQFT.html))

A picture-rich description of what's going on is in 

* [[Aaron Lauda]] and Hendryk Pfeiffer, _Open-closed strings: two-dimensional extended TQFTs and Frobenius algebras_ , Topology Appl. 155 (2008) 623-666. ([arXiv:math.AT/0510664](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.AT/0510664))
