
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea ##

Superselection theory is about identifying superselection sectors in [[quantum field theory]]. In [[quantum field theory]] there are [[conservation laws]] that specify that in an isolated system the total value of certain [[charge|charges]] (e.g. [[electric charges]], [[magnetic charges]]) cannot change due to any interactions taking place in the system. A superselection sector can be specified by prescribing a number to each of these charges, it is the space of all [[state]]s of the system with these values for the charges.

There are two complementary viewpoints about superselection sectors: 

In the Wick-Wightman-Wigner picture (reference see below) all possible [[state]]s of a system form one big [[Hilbert space]], superselection sectors are subspaces of this Hilbert space, and no measurement, that is no [[observable]], can map a state in one superselection sector to another. Further, superpositions of states in different sectors do not exist in physical reality. An example would be a superposition of a state containing one electron with a state containing two electons.

In the [[AQFT]] approach to [[quantum field theory]] the observables of the theory are selfadjoint elements of a [[C-star algebra]]. A concrete physical system is a [[state]] of this algebra, which is accompanied via the [[GNS construction]] with a representation of the algebra. A superselection sector from this viewpoint is an equivalence class of unitarily equivalent representations, see [[representation of a C-star algebra]]. 


## Examples ##

Usually, in [[AQFT]] not _all_ representations of the algebra of observables are considered to be _physically relevant_, so that superselection theory starts with the statement of conditions that representations have to fulfill in order to be **admissible**, and only those are considered. 
Example:

* [[DHR superselection theory]] 

## Related concepts

* [[superposition]]

* [[quantum interference]]

* [[entanglement]]
 
## References ##

For the Wick--Wightman--Wigner picture of superselection sectors see

* Wick, Wigner, Wightman: _The intrinsic parity of elementary particles_ (Phys. Rev. 88, 101-105, 1952)

A brief survey of that is in [section 2.3](http://iopscience.iop.org/0034-4885/38/7/001/pdf/0034-4885_38_7_001.pdf#page=781)

* R. F. Streater, _Outline of axiomatic relativistic quantum field theory_ ([pdf](http://iopscience.iop.org/0034-4885/38/7/001/pdf/0034-4885_38_7_001.pdf))

See also [[AQFT]], [[QFT]] and [[Haag-Kastler axioms]].



[[!redirects superselection theory]]
[[!redirects superselection sector]]
[[!redirects superselection sectors]]
