
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Super-Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include supergeometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A $B$-parameterized family of [[Dirac operator]]s on $d$-dimensional space gives rise to their [[determinant line bundle]] on $B$. If $d = 8k+2$ for $k \in \mathbb{N}$ this has a canonical square root line bundle, the **Pfaffian line bundle**.

## As quantum anomaly 

In the [[path integral]] [[quantization]] of [[quantum field theory]], the partial [[path integral]] of an [[action functional]] over just the [[fermionic field]]s yields in general not a function on the remaining space of bosonic fields, but a section of a [[line bundle]] on this bosonic configuration space, the [[determinant line bundle]] of the family of [[Dirac operator]]s. The [[Lorentzian metric]] assumed in relativistic quantum field theory leads in the Wick-rotated theory to the passage to the square root of this line bundle.

Therefore the nontriviality of the Pfaffian line bundle is in these dimensions the fermionic [[quantum anomaly]].

## Related entries

* [[Pfaffian]]

* **Pfaffian line bundle**

* [[fermionic path integral]]

[[!include square roots of line bundles - table]]


## References

The general notion of Pfaffian line bundle is described in section 3 of

* [[Dan Freed]], _On determinant line bundles_, Math. aspects of [[string theory]], ed. S. T. Yau, World Sci. Publ. 1987,  (revised [pdf](http://www.math.utexas.edu/~dafr/Index/determinants.pdf), [dg-ga/9505002](http://arxiv.org/abs/dg-ga/9505002))

* D. Borthwick, _The Pfaffian line bundle_, Commun. Math. Phys. __149__ (1992) (3) 463–493 [doi](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02096939) [euclid](https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104251304)

* Section 1.3 in: Ema Previato, Mauro Spera, _Isometric embeddings of infinite-dimensional Grassmannians_, Regul. Chaot. Dyn. (2011) 16: 356 [doi](https://doi.org/10.1134/S1560354711030099)

* F. Balogh, J. Harnad, J. Hurtubise, _Isotropic Grassmannians, Plücker and Cartan maps_, [arxiv/2007.03586](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.03586)

> This work is motivated by the relation between the KP and BKP integrable hierarchies, whose τ-functions may be viewed as sections of dual determinantal and Pfaffian line bundles over infinite dimensional Grassmannians. In finite dimensions, we show how to relate the Cartan map which, for a vector space $V$ of dimension $N$, embeds the Grassmannian $Gr^0_V(V+V^*)$ of maximal isotropic subspaces of $V+V^*$, with respect to the natural scalar product, into the projectivization of the exterior space $\Lambda(V)$, and the Plücker map, which embeds the Grassmannian $Gr_V(V+V^*)$ of all N-planes in $V+V^*$ into the projectivization of $\Lambda^N(V+V^*)$. The Plücker coordinates on $Gr^0_V(V+V^*)$ are expressed bilinearly in terms of the Cartan coordinates, which are holomorphic sections of the dual Pfaffian line bundle $Pf^*\to Gr^0_V(V+V^*,Q)$. In terms of affine coordinates on the big cell, this is equivalent to an identity of Cauchy-Binet type, expressing the determinants of square submatrices of a skew symmetric N×N matrix as bilinear sums over the Pfaffians of their principal minors

The [[nLab:string theory|string]] worldsheet [[Green-Schwarz mechanism]] which trivializes the worldsheet Pfaffian line bundle, and its relation to [[string structure]]s, that goes back to Killingback and [[Edward Witten]], has been formalized in

* [[Ulrich Bunke]], _String structures and trivialisations of a Pfaffian line bundle_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/0909.0846))

[[!redirects Pfaffian line bundles]]

[[!redirects Pfaffian bundle]]
[[!redirects Pfaffian bundles]]

[[!redirects pfaffian line bundle]]
[[!redirects pfaffian line bundles]]