
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Double negation
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

In [[logic]], double negation is the operation from $P$ to $\neg{\neg{P}}$, where $\neg$ is [[negation]].  In other words, double negation is the [[composite]] of [[negation]] with itself.


## In logic

In [[classical logic]], the double negation of any [[truth value]] or [[proposition]] is itself.  More abstractly, double negation is the [[identity function]] on any [[boolean algebra]].

In [[intuitionistic logic]], double negation is weaker than the identity.  That is, we have $P \Rightarrow \neg{\neg{P}}$ but not conversely.  In [[paraconsistent logic]], it is the other way around.  More abstractly, this holds in any [[Heyting algebra]] (intuitionistic) or its dual (paraconsistent).

In [[linear logic]], double negation is the identity again, although linear logic also has notions of intuitionistic negation and paraconsistent negation which act as above.


## In locale theory

Even in [[classical mathematics]], a [[frame]] is a Heyting algebra but not a boolean algebra.  Accordingly, double negation is usually not the identity on a frame.  However, the operation of double negation is a [[nucleus]] on any frame.

Thus, every [[locale]] $L$ has a [[sublocale]] given by that nucleus, called the __double negation sublocale__ and denoted $L_{\neg\neg}$.  This sublocale is [[dense sublocale|dense]], and in fact it is the smallest dense sublocale of $L$, the [[intersection]] of all dense sublocales.

Classically, we have $L = L_{\neg\neg}$ if and only if $L$ is the [[discrete locale]] on some [[set]] $S$ of points.  In [[constructive mathematics]], $S$ must also have [[decidable equality]].


## In topos theory

The notion of double negation sublocale may be [[categorification|categorified]] from locales to [[toposes]].  


### Definition

+-- {: .num_def #DoubleNegationTopology}
###### Definition/Proposition

For $\mathcal{E}$ any [[sheaf topos]] and $\Omega \in \mathcal{E}$ its
[[subobject classifier]], the double negation morphism

$$
  \not \not \Omega \to \Omega
$$

constitutes a [[Lawvere-Tierney topology]] on $\mathcal{E}$.

This is called the **[[double negation topology]]**.
=--


### Properties

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

For $\mathcal{E}$ a [[sheaf topos]], the sheaf topos 
corresponding to its [double negation topology](#DoubleNegationTopology)

$$
  \mathcal{E}_{\not \not} \hookrightarrow \mathcal{E}
$$

is a [[Boolean topos]].
=--

This appears as [MacLaneMoerdijk, theorem VI 3](#MacLaneMoerdijk).

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

For every [[prsheaf topos]] $[C^{op}, Set]$ the double negation topology coincides with the [[dense topology]].
--

This appears as [MacLaneMoerdijk, corollary VI 5](#MacLaneMoerdijk).

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

Let $C$ be a [[poset]]. Then the double negation sheaf topos

$$
  Sh_{\not \not}(C) \hookrightarrow [C^{op}, Set]
$$

satisfies the [[axiom of choice]].
=--

This appears as [MacLaneMoerdijk, corollary VI 9](#MacLaneMoerdijk).


## Referemces

Section VI of

* [[Saunders MacLane]], [[Ieke Moerdijk]], _[[Sheaves in Geometry and Logic]]_
{#MacLaneMoerdijk}


[[!redirects double negation]]
[[!redirects double negations]]
[[!redirects double-negation]]

[[!redirects double negation sublocale]]
[[!redirects double negation sublocales]]
[[!redirects double negation nucleus]]
[[!redirects double negation nuclei]]
[[!redirects double-negation sublocale]]
[[!redirects double-negation sublocales]]
[[!redirects double-negation nucleus]]
[[!redirects double-negation nuclei]]
