
# Automata
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

An automaton is an abstract concept of machine, which consists of states and processes between the states.


## Definition

An __automaton__ is formally definable as in [[Joy of Cats]] as a sextuple ($Q$, $\Sigma$, $Y$, $\delta$,  $q_{0}$, $y$), where $Q$ is the set of states,  $\Sigma$ and $Y$ are the sets of input symbols and output symbols, respectively,  $\delta$:  $\Sigma$ $\times$ $Q$ $\to$ $Q$ is the transition map, $q_{0}$ $\epsilon$ $Q$ is the initial state, and $y$: $Q$ $\to$ $Y$ is the output map.  [[morphism|Morphisms]] from an automaton ($Q$, $\Sigma$, $Y$, $\delta$,  $q_{0}$, $y$) to an automaton ($Q$′, $\Sigma$′, $Y$′, $\delta$′,  $q_{0}$′, $y$′) are triples ($f_{Q}$, $f_{\Sigma}$, $f_{Y}$) of [[function|functions]] $f_{Q}:  Q \to Q\prime$,  $f_{\Sigma}: \Sigma \to \Sigma\prime$,  and $f_{Y}:  Y \to Y\prime$ satisfying the following conditions:

(i) preservation of transition: 
    $\delta\prime$($f_{\Sigma}$($\sigma$), $f_{Q}$($q$)) =      $f_{Q}$($\delta$($\sigma$, $q$)),

(ii) preservation of outputs: $f_{Y}$($y$($q$)) = $y$$\prime$($f_{Q}$($q$)),

(iii) preservation of initial state: 
      $f_{Q}$($q_{0}$) = $q_{0}\prime$.    

A __deterministic sequential Moore automaton__ is a [[finite set|finite]] state automaton where the outputs are determined by the current state alone (and do not depend directly on the input).

A morphism $f$ : ($Q$, $\delta$, $q_{0}$, $F$) $\to$ ($Q\prime$, $\delta\prime$, $q_{0}\prime$, $F\prime$) (called a __simulation__) is a function $f : Q \to Q\prime$ that preserves:

(i) the transitions, i.e., $\delta\prime$($\sigma$, $f$($q$)) = $f$($\delta$($\sigma$, $q$)),

(ii) the initial state, i.e., $f$($q_{0}$) = $q_{0}\prime$, and

(iii) the final states, i.e., $f[F] \subseteq F\prime$.


## The category of automata

There is a [[category]] $Aut$ whose [[object|objects]] are deterministic sequential Moore automata and whose [[morphism|morphisms]] are simulations.

##Variants


There are several variant forms of automaton.  The above just gives a basic one. 


## References

* [[Jiri Adamek]], [[Horst Herrlich]], and [[George Strecker]], _Abstract and concrete categories: the joy of cats_. [free online](http://katmat.math.uni-bremen.de/acc/acc.pdf)

* [[Mark V. Lawson]], _[Finite automata](http://www.ma.hw.ac.uk/~markl/books.html)_, CRC Press.

category:computer science

[[!redirects automaton]]
[[!redirects automata]]
[[!redirects Aut]]
