

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
#### $(\infty,1)$-Topos Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include (infinity,1)-topos - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea


The theory of __cohomological descent__ deals with  the question if the [[derived geometry|derived]] analogue of the (co)monadic comparison functor is fully faithful (or more rarely an equivalence of categories) when formulated at the level of total derived functors and derived categories, and usually taken with respect to [[hypercovers]]. 

## Related concepts

* [[descent]]

  * [[cover]]

  * **cohomological descent**

  * [[descent morphism]]

  * [[monadic descent]], 

    * [[Sweedler coring]]

    * [[higher monadic descent]]

    * [[descent in noncommutative algebraic geometry]]

* [[sheaf]], [[(2,1)-sheaf]], [[2-sheaf]] [[(∞,1)-sheaf]]


## References

The notion has been introduced in

* [[Pierre Deligne]], _Théorie de Hodge. III_, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. __44__ (1974), 5--77. 

A summary is also in

* [[Donu Arapura]], _Building mixed Hodge structures_, in: The arithmetic and geometry of algebraic cycles (Banff, AB, 1998), 13--32,
CRM Proc. Lecture Notes, 24, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2000.

For a readable introduction see

* [[Brian Conrad]], _Cohomological descent_ ([pdf](http://math.stanford.edu/~conrad/papers/hypercover.pdf))

Closely related is the [[monadic descent]] in triangulated context in the sense of page 36-37 in 

* [[Alexander Rosenberg|A. L. Rosenberg]], _Topics in noncommutative algebraic geometry, homological algebra and K-theory_, preprint MPIM Bonn 2008-57 [pdf](http://www.mpim-bonn.mpg.de/preprints/send?bid=3589)

