
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Differential geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include synthetic differential geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

An _exotic smooth structure_ is, roughly speaking, a [[smooth structure]] on a [[topological manifold]] $X$ which makes the resulting [[smooth manifold]] be [[diffeomorphism|non-diffeomorphic]] to the smooth manifold given by some evident 'standard' smooth structure on $X$. 

## Properties

[Milnor (1956)](#Milnor1956) gave the first examples of exotic smooth structures on the 7-[[sphere]] constructed via a $S^3$-bundle over the 4-sphere $S^4$, finding at least seven. Note that spheres inherit a canonical smooth structure from their canonical (topological) embedding into a [[Cartesian space]] $S^n \hookrightarrow \mathbb{R}^{n+1}$.

Via the celebrated h cobordism theorem of Smale ([Smale 1962](#Smale), [Milnor 1965](#Milnor1965a)) one gets a relation between the number of smooth structures on the $n$-sphere $S^n$ (for $n \geq 5$) and the number of isotopy classes $\pi_0 (Diff(S^{n-1}))$ of the equator $S^{n-1}$. Then [Kervaire and Milnor (1963)](#KervMil) proved that there are only finitely many exotic smooth structures on all spheres in dimension 5 or higher. By using the connected sum operation, the set of smooth, non-diffeomorphic structures on the $n$-sphere has the structure of an abelian group. For the [[7-sphere]], it is the cyclic group $Z_{28}$ and Brieskorn (1966) found the generator $\Sigma$ so that $\underbrace{\Sigma\#\cdots\#\Sigma}_28$ is the standard sphere.

A complete classification of smooth, PL and topological structures on manifolds in dimension 5 and higher was established by [Kirby and Siebenmann (1977)](#KirbSieb) using obstruction theory.

Note that there exist uncountably many exotic smooth structures on $\mathbb{R}^4$ ([Gompf 1985](#Gompf), [Freedman/Taylor 1986](#FreedTay), [Taubes 1987](#Taubes)), but a unique smooth structure on $\mathbb{R}^n$ for $n\neq 4$ ([Stallings, Zeeman 1962](#StallZee)). There is a unique maximal exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$ into which all other 'versions' of $\mathbb{R}^4$ smoothly embed as open subsets (Freedman/Taylor 1986, [DeMichelis/Freedman 1992](#DeMFreed)).

There are two classes of exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$'s: large and small. A large exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$ cannot be embedded in the 4-sphere $S^4$ (Gompf 1985, Taubes 1987) whereas a small exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$ admits such an embedding (DeMichelis/Freedman 1992). A large exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$ is constructed by using the failure to smoothly split a smooth 4-manifold (the K3 surface for instance) as connected sum of some factors (where a topological splitting exits). The small exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$ (or ribbon $\mathbb{R}^4$) is constructed by using the failure of the smooth h cobordism theorem in dimension 4 ([Donaldson 1987](#Donaldson1), [1990](#Donaldson2)). [Bizaca and Gompf (1996)](#BizGompf) are able to present an infinite handle body of a small exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$ which serve as a coordinate representation.

[Moise (1952)](#Moise) proved that in dimension 3 there are no exotic differentiable structures, or to put in another way, 3-dimensional differentiable manifolds which are [[homeomorphism|homeomorphic]] are [[diffeomorphism|diffeomorphic]]. In this way the 3-sphere $S^3$ inherits a unique differentiable structure, no matter which $\mathbb{R}^4$ it is considered to be embedded in.

[Rado (1925)](#Rad) proved that in dimension 2 there are no exotic differentiable structures (or the uniqueness of the standard structure). The classification of 1-dimensional manifolds and the uniqueness of the smooth structure can be found in the Appendix of [Milnor (1965b)](#Milnor1965b).

## Examples

### Exotic 7-spheres

The [[7-spheres]] constructed in [Milnor 1956](#Milnor1956) are all examples of [[fibre bundles]] over the [[4-sphere]] $S^4$ with [[fibre]] the [[3-sphere]] $S^3$, with [[structure group]] the [[special orthogonal group]] $SO(4)$. By the classification of bundles on spheres, these correspond to [[homotopy classes]] of maps $S^3 \to SO(4)$, i.e. elements of $\pi_3(SO(4))$. From the table at [orthogonal group -- Homtopy groups](orthogonal+group#HomotopyGroups), this latter group is $\mathbb{Z}\oplus\mathbb{Z}$. Thus any such bundle can be described, up to [[isomorphism]], by a [[pair]] of [[integers]] $(n,m)$. When $n+m=1$, then one can show there is a [[Morse function]] with exactly two [[critical points]] on the total space of the bundle, and hence this 7-manifold is [[homeomorphic]] to a sphere.

The fractional first [[Pontryagin class]] $\frac{p_1}{2} \in H^4(S^4) \simeq \mathbb{Z}$ of the bundle is given by $n-m$. Milnor constructs, using [[cobordism]] theory and [[Hirzebruch's signature theorem]] for 8-manifolds, a mod-7 diffeomorphism invariant of the manifold, so that it is standard 7-sphere precisely when $\frac{p_1}{2}^2 -1 = 0 (mod 7)$.

## References

* Wikipedia, _[Exotic sphere](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exotic_sphere)_

### For the mathematical theory

The first construction of exotic smooth structures was on the 7-[[sphere]] in 

* [[John Milnor]] (1956), "On manifolds homeomorphic to the 7-sphere", Annals of Mathematics (Annals of Mathematics) 64 (2): 399–405
{#Milnor1956}

(...)

* {#Smale} [[Stephen Smale]],  (1962), "On the structure of manifolds" , Amer. J. of Math. 84 : 387-399

* {#Milnor1965a} [[John Milnor]] (1965), _Lectures on the h-cobordism theorem_ (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton)


* {#KervMil} [[Michel Kervaire]], ; [[John Milnor]],  (1963) "Groups of homotopy spheres: I", Ann. Math. 77, pp. 504 - 537.


* {#KirbSieb} Kirby, R.; Siebenmann, L. (1977) _Foundational essays on topological manifolds, smoothings, and triangulations_, Ann. Math. Studies (Princeton University Press, Princeton).


* {#StallZee} Stallings, John R.; Zeeman, E. C. (1962), "The piecewise-linear structure of Euclidean space", Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 58: 481–488


* {#Moise} Moise, Edwin E. (1952) "Affine structures on 3-manifolds", Ann. Math. 56, pp. 96-114


* {#FreedTay} Freedman, Michael H.; Taylor, Laurence (1986) "A universal smoothing of four-space", J. Diff. Geom. 24, pp. 69-78


* {#DeMFreed} De Michelis, Stefano; Freedman, Michael H. (1992) "Uncountably many exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$'s in standard 4-space", J. Diff. Geom. 35, pp. 219-254.
 

* {#Donaldson1} Donaldson, Simon (1987) "Irrationality and the h-cobordism conjecture", J. Diff. Geom. 26, pp. 141-168.


* {#Donaldson2} [[Simon Donaldson]],  (1990) "Polynomial invariants for smooth four manifolds", Topology 29, pp. 257-315.
 

* {#Gompf} Gompf, Robert (1985) "An infinite set of exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$'s", J. Diff. Geom. 21, pp. 283-300.


* {#Taubes} Taubes, Clifford H. (1987) "Gauge theory on asymptotically periodic 4-manifolds", J. Diff. Geom. 25, pp. 363-430
 

* {#BizGompf} Bizaca, Z.; Gompf, Robert (1996) "Elliptic surfaces and some simple exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$'s", J. Diff. Geom. 43, pp. 458-504.


* {#Rad} Rado, T. (1925) "Über den Begriff der Riemannschen Fläche" , Acta Litt. Scient. Univ. Szegd 2, pp. 101-121


* {#Milnor1965b} Milnor, John W. (1965b) _Topology from the Differentiable Viewpoint_ (University Press of Virginia)


(see Wikipedia ([spheres](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exotic_sphere#References), [$R^4$](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exotic_R4#References)) for more for now)


### For applications to physics



#### General relativity

The original argument that exotic spheres are to be regarded as [[instantons]] of [[gravity]] is on p. 12 of

* [[Edward Witten]], _Global gravitational anomalies_ Comm. Math. Phys. Volume 100, Number 2 (1985), 197--229.  ([EUCLID](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1103943444))

Further discussion of exotic $4$-manifolds from the [[general relativity]] point of view is in 

* [[Carl Brans]], Duane Randall, _Exotic differentiable structures and general relativity_ Gen. Rel. Grav., 25 (1993) 205--220

* [[Carl Brans]] _Exotic smoothness and physics_ J. Math. Phys. 35, (1994), 5494--5506.

The following paper contained a first proof to localize exotic smoothness in an exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$:

* [[Carl Brans]] _Localized exotic smoothness_ Class. Quant. Grav., 11, (1994), 1785--1792.

A more philosophical discussion can be found in:

* [[Carl Brans]] _Absolute spacetime: the twentieth century ether_ Gen. Rel. Grav. 31, (1999),  597--609



#### Generation of source terms (fields)

Brans conjectured in the papers above, that exotic smoothness should be a source of an additional [[gravity|gravitational field]] (Brans conjecture). This conjecture was confirmed for compact $4$-manifolds (using implicitly a mapping of basic classes):


Using the invariant of L. Taylor [arXiv](http://de.arxiv.org/abs/math/9807143), Sladkowski confirmed the conjecture for the exotic $\mathbb{R}^4$ in:

* Jan Sładkowski _Gravity on exotic R4 with few symmetries_ Int.J. Mod. Phys. D, 10, (2001) 311--313



#### Quantum (field) theory

The first real connection between exotic smoothness and [[quantum field theory]] is Witten's TQFT:

* [[Edward Witten]], _Topological quantum field theory_ Comm. Math. Phys., 117, (1988), 353--386.

and the whole work of Seiberg and Witten leading to the celebrated invariants.

The relation to particle physics by using the algebra of smooth functions can be found in

* Jan Sładkowski, _Exotic smoothness, noncommutative geometry and particle physics_ Int. J. Theor. Phys., 35, (1996), 2075–2083

* Jan Sładkowski, _Exotic smoothness and particle physics_ Acta Phys. Polon., B 27, (1996), 1649–1652

* Jan Sładkowski, _Exotic smoothness, fundamental interactions and noncommutative geometry_ [arXiv] (http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9610093)

The relation between TQFT and differential-topological invariants of smooth manifolds was clarified in:

* [[Hendryk Pfeiffer]] _Quantum general relativity and the classification of smooth manifolds_ [arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0404088)

* [[Hendryk Pfeiffer]] _Diffeomorphisms from finite triangulations and absence of 'local' degrees of freedom_ Phys.Lett. B, 591, (2004), 197-201 


#### String theory

An argument for interpreting exotic smooth spheres as [[gravitational instanton]]s and to cancel the gravitational anomalies of [[string theory]] is in

* [[Edward Witten]], _Global gravitational anomalies_ Comm. Math. Phys. Volume 100, Number 2 (1985), 197--229.  ([web](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1103943444))

The influence of exotic smoothness for [[Kaluza-Klein mechanism|Kaluza-Klein models]] was discussed here:

* [[Matthias Kreck]], [[Stefan Stolz]], _A diffeomorphism classification of $7$-dimensional homogeneous Einstein manifolds with $\mathfrak{su}(3) \times \mathfrak{su}(2) \times \mathfrak{u}(1)$-symmetry_ Ann. Math. 127, (1988), 373--388.

A discussion of topological effects (also of string theory) in relation to exotic smoothness is in

* Ryan Rohm, _Topological Defects and Differential Structures_ Annals Of Physics, 189, (1989), 223--239.






 
#### Cosmology


An overview can be also found in

* Jan Sładkowski, _Exotic smoothness and astrophysics_ Act. Phys. Polon. B, 40, (2009), 3157--3163


#### Quantum gravity

A first calculation of the state sum in [[quantum gravity]] by inclusion of exotic smoothness

* Kristin Schleich, Donald Witt, _Exotic Spaces in Quantum Gravity I: Euclidean Quantum Gravity in Seven Dimensions_ Class.Quant.Grav., 16, (1999), 2447--2469

A semi-classical approach to the functional integral is discussed here:

* Christofer Duston, _Exotic smoothness in 4 dimensions and semiclassical Euclidean quantum gravity_ [arxiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/0911.4068)

The inclusion of singularities for asymptotically flat spacetimes is discussed here (with an example of a singularity coming from exotic smoothness):

* Kristin Schleich, Donald Witt, _Singularities from the Topology and Differentiable Structure of Asymptotically Flat Spacetimes_, [arxiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/1006.2890)


[[!redirects exotic smooth structure]]
[[!redirects exotic smooth structures]]

[[!redirects exotic sphere]]
[[!redirects exotic spheres]]