+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Higher algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea

The notion of _Lawvere theory_ is a joint generalization of the notions of [[group]], [[ring]], [[associative algebra]], etc. 

In his [[Functorial Semantics of Algebraic Theories|1963 doctoral dissertation]], Bill Lawvere introduced a new categorical method for doing [[universal algebra]], alternative to the usual way of presenting an algebraic concept by means of its logical [[signature (in logic)|signature]] (with generating operations satisfying equational axioms). The rough idea is to define an [[algebraic theory]] as a [[category]] with finite [[product]]s and possessing a "generic algebra" (e.g., a generic [[group]]), and then define a [[model]] of that [[theory]] (e.g., a group) as a product-preserving [[functor]] out of that [[category]]. This type of category is what is nowadays called a _Lawvere algebraic theory_, or just Lawvere theory. 


## Definition

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition

A **Lawvere [[theory]]** or **finite-product theory** is (equivalently encoded by its [[syntactic category]] which is) a [[category]] $T$ with finite [[products]] in which every [[object]] is [[isomorphism|isomorphic]] to a finite cartesian power $x^n = x \times x \times \cdots \times x$ of a distinguished object $x$ (called the _generic object_ for the theory $T$). 

A _[[homomorphism]]_ of such theories $T \to T'$ is a product-preserving [[functor]]. 

=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Remark

For $T$ a Lawvere theory, we are to think of the [[hom-set]] $T(n,1) := T(x^n, x)$ as the set of $n$-ary operations definable in the theory. For instance for $T$ the theory of [[abelian group]]s, $T(2,1)$ includes operations like $+ \colon (x, y) \mapsto x + y$, $- \colon (x, y) \mapsto x-y$, and $(x, y) \mapsto 2 x - 3 y$. For $0$-ary or nullary operations, we have $T(0,1) = \{0\}$. 

=--

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition

A **[[model]]** of $T$ -- an **[[algebra over a Lawvere theory|algebra over the Lawvere theory]]** or simply **$T$-algebra** -- is a product-preserving [[functor]] 

$$
  A : T \to Set
  \,,
$$ 

and _homomorphism of $T$-algebras_ is a [[natural transformation]] between such functors. 

=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Remark

Such a functor picks out a single [[set]] $U(A) := A(1)$ and picks for every $n$-ary abstract operation $\phi \in T(n,1)$ an actual $n$-ary operation on the elements of this set

$$
  A(\phi) : U(A)^n \to U(A)
$$

such that these operations are all compatible with each other in the way governed by the composition rules of morphisms in $T$.

=--


### Remarks

1. It is common to adopt the (slightly [[evil]]) convention that every object of $T$ is _equal_ to a chosen power of $x$. Thus, if $Fin$ is the category of finite cardinals and functions between them, then the unique (up to isomorphism) product-preserving functor $Fin^{op} \to T$  that takes the 1-element cardinal to $x$ is commonly supposed to be surjective on objects (rather than, less evilly, [[essentially surjective functor|essentially surjective]]), or even an isomorphism on objects so that each morphism $x^n \to x$ has a well-defined [[signature (in logic)|arity]] $n$. 

1. Some people use 'finite-product theory' to mean any (small) category with finite products, reserving 'Lawvere theory' to refer to finite product theories with the property that every object is isomorphic to a product of finitely many copies of a given object $x$. Finite-product theories $C$ can be regarded as a special case of multisorted Lawvere theories (see below) where the set of sorts is $Ob(C)$ itself. Some, but not all, the above discussion generalizes to this case. 

1. As _finite-product theories_, Lawvere theories are at one end of a spectrum of [[theory|theories]] of differing logical strengths. For example, there are left exact theories, [[regular theory|regular theories]], geometric theories, and so on, which require for their interpretation categories of differing degrees of strength in their [[internal logic]]. See also [[classifying topos]].

1. If $C$ is a category with finite products, then a group (object) in $C$ may be defined as a product-preserving functor $T_{Grp} \to C$. For example, a topological group may be identified with a functor $T_{Grp} \to Top$, and a Lie group with a product-preserving functor $T_{Grp} \to Man$ into the category of smooth [[manifold]]s. An analogous statement holds for any finitary algebraic theory, when formulated in terms of its Lawvere theory $T$. 


### Variations

* A **multisorted** or multityped Lawvere theory for a given set of sorts $S$ is a category with finite products $C$ together with a function $i: S \to Ob(C)$ such that every object of $C$ is isomorphic to a finite product of objects of the form $i(S)$. An example is the theory for ring-module pairs, which may be regarded as a two-sorted theory in which one sort is interpreted as a ring and the other as a module over that ring. 

* An [[infinitary Lawvere theory]] allows for infinitary operations.  An example is the theory of [[suplattices]], where we have, for every [[cardinal number]] $n$, an operation to take the [[supremum]] of $n$ elements.  While Lawvere theories correspond to finitary monads on $Set$, infinitary Lawvere theories correspond to arbitrary monads.

* A [[Fermat theory]] is a Lawvere theory equipped with a notion of differentiation.

* A finite-product theory can also be presented without including all the products of the basic types as actual objects.  This yields the notion of [[cartesian multicategory]].

## Examples

### The theory of sets {#TheoryOfSets}

The tautological example of a Lawvere theory is the algebraic theory of _no_ operations. This is also called the **theory of equality**.

Its syntactic category is the category $\mathcal{S}$ on objects $n \in \mathbb{N}$ with morphisms generated by the projections $\pi_i : n \to 1$. This is the [[opposite category]] of the category [[FinSet]]

$$
  \mathcal{S} \simeq FinSet^{op}
  \,.
$$


This is the [[initial object]] in the category of Lawvere theories.


An algebra over this theory is just a bare [[set]]:

$$
  \mathcal{S} Alg \simeq Set
  \,.
$$

For $T$ any Lawvere theory, there is a canonical morphism $\mathcal{S} \to T$. On categories of algebras this induces the functor

$$
  U_T : T Alg \to \mathcal{S}Alg \simeq Set
  \,.
$$

This sends each algebra to its _underlying set_ . For more on this see the section [Free T-algebras](#FreeAlgebras) below.



### The theory of groups

We consider here the theory of [[group]]s (defined however you like). To get the corresponding Lawvere theory $T$, let $F(n)$ (for any natural number $n \geq 0$) be a free group on $n$ generators, and define the Lawvere theory $T_{Grp}$ to be the category [[opposite category|opposite]] to the category of free groups $F(n)$ and group homomorphisms. The generic object $x$ of $T_{Grp}$ is taken to be $F(1)$. 

The category of free groups has finite coproducts since $F(m) + F(n) \cong F(m+n)$ (in other words, the inclusion 

$$FreeGroup \hookrightarrow Group$$ 

creates coproducts in $FreeGroup$), so $T_{Grp}$ has finite products, and we have $F(n) = x^n$ in $T_{Grp}$. Any group $G$ defines a product-preserving functor 

$$T_{Grp} = FreeGroup^{op} \hookrightarrow Group^{op} \stackrel{\hom(-, G)}{\to} Set$$ 

since contravariant hom-functors take coproducts to products. Thus any group gives a model of $T_{Grp}$. 

The other direction is more interesting. Let 

$$M: T_{Grp} \to Set$$ 

be a model of $T_{Grp}$, i.e., a product-preserving functor. We will define a group structure on $G = M(x)$, the underlying set of the group. 

To understand this, let's consider how group multiplication would be defined. The idea is that $x$ in $T_{Grp}$ is a "generic group", so we first need to understand how multiplication works there. The idea is that the product 
in the generic group 
$$m: x^2 \to x^1$$ 
corresponds to a homomorphism 
$$F(1) \to F(2)$$
which by freeness corresponds to an element $1 \to F(2)$, and the element we are after should be the product $a b$ of the generators $a, b$ of the free group $F(2) = F(a, b)$. The generators $a, b$ themselves correspond to the two coproduct inclusions 
$$i_1: F(1) \to F(1) + F(1) = F(2) \qquad i_2: F(1) \to F(1) + F(1) = F(2)$$ 

Then, since $M$ is assumed to [[exact functor|preserve products]], we obtain a map 
$$G \times G = M(x) \times M(x) \cong M(x^2) \stackrel{M(m)}{\to} M(x) = G$$ 
and this defines the group multiplication on $G$. The group identity and group inversion on $G$ are defined by following similar recipes. 

It may be checked that the notion of homomorphism of $T_{Grp}$-models (as defined above) coincides with the usual notion of group homomorphism. In summary, the category of groups is equivalent to the category of models of $T_{Grp}$. 

In particular, any hom-functor 

$$\hom_{T_{Grp}}(x^n, -): T_{Grp} \to Set$$ 

preserves products, and so defines a group. This group is precisely the free group on $n$ generators, and a little thought shows that the $n$ generators correspond to the natural transformations 
$$\hom_{T_{Grp}}(x, -) \to \hom_{T_{Grp}}(x^n, -)$$
induced by the $n$ projection maps $x^n \to x$. 

All of the discussion above for the case of groups generalizes to any finitary [[algebraic theory]] (i.e., any single-sorted theory whose signature consists of function symbols of finite arity, subject to universally quantified equational axioms). In summary: 

* The Lawvere theory $T$ is the category opposite to the category of free algebras on finitely many generators, 

* The category of algebras is in turn equivalent to the category of product-preserving functors $T \to Set$, and 

* The free algebras are retrieved as the representable functors $T \to Set$. 

As discussed in the article on [[operad|operads]], the notion of Lawvere theory may also be formulated in terms of operads relative to the theory of [[cartesian monoidal category|cartesian monoidal categories]]. 

### Other examples

* For $k$ a [[field]], the category of _free $k$-associative algebras_ is the (syntactic category of the) theory of ordinary [[associative algebra]]s over $k$.

* The category [[CartSp]] is the (syntactic category of the) theory of [[smooth algebra]]s. This is also a [[Fermat theory]].

## Properties


### Coequalizers of $T$-algebras

+-- {: .un_def}
###### Definition (congruence)
{#congruence}

Let $T$ be a Lawvere theory and $A$ a $T$-algebra. A **[[congruence]]**  on $A$  is an [[equivalence relation]] on the set $A(1)$ such that whenever for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$ whenever any $(a_i \in A(1))_{i=1}^n$ and $(b_i \in A(1))_{i=1}^n$ are pairwise eqivalent, $a_i \sim b_i$, then also for every operation $f \in T(n,1)$ the results are equivalent: $f(a_1, \cdot, a_n) \sim f(b_1, \cdots , b_n)$.

=--

+-- {: .un_lemma}
###### Observation/Definition

For $A$ a $T$-algebra and for every [[relation]] $R \subset A(1) \times A(1)$ there is a smallest [congruence](#congruence) on $A$ containing $R$. Write $\langle R \rangle \subset A(1) \times A(1)$ for this smallest congruence.

=--

+-- {: .un_prop}
###### Proposition

For $A$ a $T$-algebra and $C$ a congruence on $A$, the relation $A/C(f) \subset (A/C)^n \times A/C$ induced by $A(f)$ for each $f : \in T(n,1)$ are functions and define a $T$-algebra structure on $A(1)/C$.

=--

+-- {: .un_prop}
###### Proposition

For $f,g : A \to B$ two morphisms of $T$-algebras, the canonical morphism
$B \to B/\langle \f(a)\sim g(a) | a \in A(1)\rangle$ is the [[coequalizer]] of $f$ and $g$.

=--




### Free $T$-algebras and underlying sets {#FreeAlgebras}


Write $\mathcal{S}$ for the (syntactic category of the) algebraic theory of sets (described [above](#TheoryOfSets)). Then for $T$ any other (syntactic category of a) Lawvere theory, there is a canonical morphism

$$
  i_T :  \mathcal{S} \to T
  \,.
$$

By precomposition with $i_T$ we obtain a corresponding functor on $T$-algebras, which we write

$$
  U_T : T Alg \to Set
$$

and call the **underlying set** functor.

+-- {: .un_lemma}
###### Lemma

The functor $U_T$ has a [[left adjoint]] $F_T : Set \to T Alg$.

=--

This is a standard example of a [[free functor]], called the **free $T$-algebra functor**.

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

For $S \in $ [[Set]], let $F_T(S)$ be the $T$-algebra whose underlying set is the set of formal expressions $\{f(s_1, \cdots, s_n) | f \in T(n,1), s_i \in S\}$ with the evident composition operation. 

=--


+-- {: .un_lemma}
###### Observation


For $S = (n) \in$ [[FinSet]] a _finite set_ with $n$ elements , the free $T$-algebra on $S$ is just the [[representable functor|representable]]

$$
  F_T(S) = T(n,-) : T \to Set
  \,.
$$

The adjunction isomorphism

$$
  T Alg(F_T(S), A) \simeq Set(S, U_T(A)) \simeq  (A(1))^n \simeq A(n)
$$

is in this case just the [[Yoneda lemma]].

$$
  T Alg(T(n,-),A) \simeq A(n)
  \,.
$$

Notice that this extends to a functor

$$
  F_T(-) : FinSet \to T Alg
$$

which is the composite

$$
  F_T(-) : FinSet \stackrel{i_T^{op}}{\to} T^{op}
  \stackrel{j}{\to}
  T Alg
$$

of the [[Yoneda embedding]] with the opposite of the canonical functor
$i_T : FinSet^{op} \simeq \mathcal{S} \to T$ from the theory of sets,
described [above](#TheoryOfSets).

More generally, for $S \in Set$ not necessarily finite, let
$Sub(S)$ be the [[poset]] of finite subsets of $S$ and their inclusions.

Then $F_T(S)$ is the [[filtered colimit]] of the representables 
corresponding to the finite subsets

$$
  F_T(S) \simeq {\lim_{\to}}_{{n \in Sub(S)}} T(n,-)
  \,.
$$

As discussed [below](#CoLimitsOfTAlgebras), these filtered colimits of $T$-algebras are computed objectwise.

=--




### Adjunctions of relatively free $T$-algebras {#AdjCatAlgs}


The following establishes that more generally any morphism of Lawvere theories leads to an adjunction between their categories of algebras. 


Let $T_1$ and $T_2$ be Lawvere theories and $f : T_1 \to T_2$ a morphism. Write
$f^* : T_2 Alg \to T_1 Alg $ for the functor on categories of algebras induced by precomposition with $f$.

+-- {: .un_lemma}
###### Lemma

The functor $f^*$ has a [[left adjoint]] $f_* : T_1 Alg \to T_2 Alg$.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

Here is an elementary proof:

Let $F_{T_i} \dashv U_{T_i}$ be the two [free algebra/underlying-set adjunctions](#FreeAlgebras). For $A$ a $T_1$-algebra there is a $T_1$-[congruence](#congruence) $\Gamma$ such that

$$
  A \simeq F_{T_1} U_{T_1}(A) / \Gamma
  \,.
$$ 

Since for any set $S$ we have $U_{T_1} F_{T_1}(S) \subset U_{T_2} F_{T_2}(S)$ it follows that $\Gamma \subset T_{T_2} F_{T_2} U_{T_1}(A)$. For $\langle \Gamma \rangle$ the smallest $T_2$-congruence containing $\Gamma$ we have that $F_{T_2} U_{T_1}(A) / \langle \Gamma \rangle$ is a $T_2$-algebra. 

This one checks is  $f_* A$.


Here is a more high-powered way to obtain this using the [[monad]]s $K_i$ whose algebras are $T_i$-algebras:

for $A$ a $T_1$-algebra let $f_* A  := K_2 \circ_{K_1} A$ the the evident reflexive [[coequalizer]] 

$$
  K_2 K_1 A \stackrel{\to}{\to} K_2 A \to K_2 \circ_{K_1} A
$$ 

in $T_2 Alg$.

=--

### Limits and colimits of $T$-algebras {#CoLimitsOfTAlgebras}

+-- {: .un_prop}
###### Proposition

For $T$ a Lawvere theory, the category $T Alg$ has all small [[limit]]s and [[colimit]]s. 

The [[limit]]s and the [[filtered colimit]]s in $T Alg$ are computed pointwise.


=--


## Related concepts

* [[algebraic theory]] / [[generalized algebraic theory]] / **Lawvere theory** /  [[2-Lawvere theory]] [[(∞,1)-algebraic theory]]

  * [[globular theory]]

* [[monad]] / [[(∞,1)-monad]]

* [[operad]] / [[(∞,1)-operad]]

* [Voevodsky](#Voevodsky) proves an equivalence between Lawvere theories and l-bijective [[C-systems]].


## References

The origin of the categorical formulation of [[algebraic theories]] as Lawvere theories is in

* [[William Lawvere]], [[Functorial Semantics of Algebraic Theories]] , Ph.D. thesis Columbia University (1963).  Published with an author's comment and a supplement in: Reprints in Theory and Applications of Categories **5** (2004) pp 1--121. ([abstract](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/reprints/articles/5/tr5abs.html))

The concept was then streamlined in

* [[Samuel Eilenberg]], J. B. Wright, _Automata in General Algebras_ , Information and Control **11** (1967) pp.452-470.

Also still worthwhile reading are the following early papers:

* [[Gavin Wraith]], _Algebraic Theories_ , Aarhus Lecture Notes Series no.22 (1969). ([pdf, 3,7MB](http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/s0894694/scans/wraith-algebraic-theories.pdf))

* [[Gavin Wraith]], _Algebras over Theories_ , Colloquium Mathematicum **XXIII** no.2 (1971) pp.181-190. ([pdf](https://eudml.org/doc/archive%5Cdsc_569f%5Cdsc_40fc%5C/bwmeta1.element.desklight-374f9cbc-939c-4bdb-8b0c-c21872987c9a/full-text/cm23_2_01.pdf))

Textbook treatments are

* [[Francis Borceux]], _Handbook of categorical algebra 2 -- Categories and structures_ , Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications, Cambridge UP 1994. (chap. 3)

* M. C. Pedicchio,  F. Rovatti, _Algebraic Categories_ , pp.269-310 in Pedicchio, Tholen (eds.), _Categorical Foundations_ , Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications **97**, Cambridge UP 2004.

A recent monograph is

* [[Jiri Adamek|J. Adámek]], [[Jiri Rosicky|J. Rosicky]], [[Enrico Vitale|E. M. Vitale]], _Algebraic Theories - a Categorical Introduction to General Algebra_ , Cambrige UP 2010. ([draft](http://www.iti.cs.tu-bs.de/~adamek/algebraic_theories.pdf))

The concept of an internal algebraic theory in topos theory is dicussed in

* [[Peter Johnstone]], [[Gavin Wraith]], _Algebraic theories in toposes_ , pp.141-242 in LNM **661** Springer Heidelberg 1978. 

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _Topos Theory_ , Academic Press New York 1977. (Dover reprint 2014; sec. 6.4, pp.190-198)

For a comparison with the concept of monads see

* [[Martin Hyland]], [[John Power]], _The Category Theoretic Understanding of Universal Algebra: Lawvere Theories and Monads_ , Electronic Notes in Theor. Comp. Sci. **172** (2007) pp.437-458. ([preprint](https://www.dpmms.cam.ac.uk/~martin/Research/Publications/2007/hp07.pdf))

[[distributive law|Distributive laws]] for algebraic theories are discussed in

* [[Eugenia Cheng]], _Distributive laws for Lawvere theories_ , arXiv:1112.3076 (2011). ([abstract](http://arxiv.org/abs/1112.3076))

Other references are

* M. Jibladze, T. Pirashvili, _Cohomolgy of Algebraic Theories_ , J. Algebra **137** no.2 (1991) pp.253–296.

* [[Steve Lack]], [[Jiri Rosicky]], _Notions of Lawvere theory_ , arXiv:0810.2578. ([abstract](http://arxiv.org/abs/0810.2578))

* [[Enrico Vitale]], _Localization of Algebraic Categories_ , JPAA **108** (1996) pp.315-320.

* [[Enrico Vitale]], _Localization of Algebraic Categories 2_ , JPAA **133** (1998) pp.317-326.

Voevodsky's work:

* [[Vladimir Voevodsky]] {#Voevodsky},  Lawvere theories and C-systems, 2015 [arxiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.08104)


[[!redirects lawvere theory]]
[[!redirects Lawvere theory]]
[[!redirects Lawvere theories]]
[[!redirects finitary Lawvere theory]]
[[!redirects finitary Lawvere theories]]

[[!redirects finite-product theory]]
[[!redirects finite-product theories]]
[[!redirects finite product theory]]
[[!redirects finite product theories]]
[[!redirects finite-products theory]]
[[!redirects finite-products theories]]
[[!redirects finite products theory]]
[[!redirects finite products theories]]