
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Definition

A **division algebra** is a possibly [[non-associative algebra]] $A$, typically over a [[field]] $k$, which has the property that for any nonzero element $a$ and any element $b$, the equations $a x=b$ and $x a=b$ each have a unique solution for $x$ in the algebra. 

Usually the algebra is assumed to have a [[unital magma|multiplicative identity]], in which case this condition implies that each element has a left inverse and a right inverse. These inverses necessarily coincide if the algebra is [[associative algebra|associative]], but this may fail in the absence of associativity.

A sub-topic of interest is the existence of a multiplicative norm for the algebra, see at _[[normed division algebra]]_.


### Other definitions

An alternative definition is used in [Baez 02](#Baez02): The axioms given there require that the algebra is finite-dimensional over $k$ and that for any $a$ and $b$ in the algebra, $a b = 0$ implies at least one of $a$ or $b$ is already $0$.  This coincides with the definition given above for [[finite-dimensional vector space|finite dimensional]] algebras.


## Examples

* Perhaps the most famous division algebras are the [[real numbers]] $\mathbb{R}$, the [[complex numbers]] $\mathbb{C}$, the [[quaternions]] $\mathbb{H}$, and the [[octonions]] $\mathbb{O}$. According to the [[Hurwitz theorem]], these are the only normed, finite dimensional, real division algebras.

* Any [[division ring]] is an associative division algebra over its [[center]] and has identity, but it may not be finite dimensional over its center.

* The ring of rational [[polynomials]] $\mathbb{R}(X)$ is an infinite dimensional real associative division algebra.


* There exists a division algebra with identity that does not have two-sided inverses for every nonzero element.


## Counter-examples

* There exists a [[reciprocal algebra]] with nonzero zero divisors.

* The [[sedenions]] $\mathbb{S}$ are a finite-dimensional normed real algebra that is not a division algebra (it has zero divisors.)

* The ideal generated by $Y$ in the [[polynomial ring]] $\mathbb{R}[Y]$ is an associative, commutative, infinite dimensional real algebra without identity and without zero divisors. The equation $Yx=Y$ does not have a solution for $Y$ in the algebra.

## Related concepts

For many applications (also to [[physics]]) the most interesting division algebras are the [[normed division algebras]] over the [[real numbers]]: By the [[Hurwitz theorem]] these are the [[real numbers]], [[complex numbers]], [[quaternion|quaternions]] and [[octonion|octonions]].  These have important relations to [[division algebras and supersymmetry|supersymmetry]].

[[!include exceptional spinors and division algebras -- table]]

See at _[[division algebra and supersymmetry]]_.

* [[Hopf invariant one]]

## References

See also

* [[eom]], _[Division algebra](https://encyclopediaofmath.org/wiki/Division_algebra)_

* Wikipedia, _[Division algebra](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Division_algebra)_

* {#Baez02} [[John Baez]], Section 1.1 _Preliminaries_ In: _The octonions_, _Bull. Amer. Math. Soc._ **39** (2002), 145-205.   ([doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-01-00934-X](https://doi.org/10.1090/S0273-0979-01-00934-X), [website](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/octonions/node2.html))




[[!redirects division algebra]]
[[!redirects division algebras]]
