

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

Let $f : X \to Y$ be a morphism of [[schemes]]. Write $\Delta : X \to X \times_Y X$ for the [[diagonal]] morphism. 

* The morphism $f$ is called __separated__ if $\Delta(X)$ is a [[closed subspace]] of $X \times_Y X$.

* A [[scheme]] $X$ is called __separated__ if the [[terminal object|terminal]] morphism $X \to \operatorname{Spec} \mathbb{Z}$ is separated.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Let $X$ be a [[scheme]] (resp. a [[locally noetherian scheme]]),
 $f: X\to Y$ a morphism of schemes (resp. a morphism locally of finite type). The following conditions are equivalent.

1. $f$ is separated.

1. The [[diagonal]] morphism $X\to X\times_Y X$ is [[quasicompact morphism|quasicompact]], and for every affine scheme $Y' = Spec A$ in which $A$ is a [[valuation ring]] (resp. a discrete valuation ring), any two morphisms from $Y'\to X$ which coincide at the generic point of $Y'$ are equal.

1. The diagonal morphism $X\to X\times_Y X$ is quasicompact, and for every affine scheme of the form  $Y' = Spec A$ in which $A$ is a valuation ring (resp. a discrete valuation ring), any two sections of $X' = X(Y')$ which coincide at the generic point of $Y'$ are equal. 

=--

This is the _[[valuative criterion of separatedness]]_. See Hartshorne or [[EGA II]] for more details.

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

Therefore separated schemes are analogous to [[Hausdorff space|Hausdorff topological spaces]] (which are also sometimes called 'separated') and more generally of [[Hausdorff toposes]].  The characterization in terms of the diagonal map is precisely the same as that used for Hausdorff [[locales]]. See _[[separated geometric morphism]]_ for more.

=--

## Properties

(...)

## Related concepts


* [[separated geometric morphism]]

* [[Hausdorff topos]], [[Hausdorff topological space]]

category: algebraic geometry

[[!redirects separated morphisms of schemes]]
[[!redirects separated scheme]]
[[!redirects separated schemes]]

[[!redirects locally separated]]
