Formal noncommutative symplectic geometry (generalizing [[symplectic geometry]] to the context of [[noncommutative geometry]]) has been introduced by [[Maxim Kontsevich]], motivated by several constructions in geometry and [[mathematical physics]] including the [[cohomology]] of (compactifications of) certain [[moduli space]]s, cohomology of [[foliation]]s and perturbation expansions of [[Chern-Simons theory]]. He noticed that there is a parallel between computations in such seemingly distant problems, and conjectured a generalized version of [[Lie theory]] which should apply to those, and which should be at formal level reflected in some version of duality theory. The underlying theory has been constructed by Kapranov and Ginzburg following his advice as a [[Koszul duality]] for operads. 

## References 

* Kontsevich gave lectures at Harvard in 1991-1992 on aspects related to the expansions of Chern-Simons theory. 

* Maxim Kontsevich, _Formal (non)-commutative symplectic geometry_, The Gelfand Mathematical. Seminars, 1990-1992, Ed. L.Corwin, I.Gelfand, J.Lepowsky, Birkhauser 1993, 173-187, [pdf](http://193.51.104.7/~maxim/TEXTS/Formal%20non-commutative%20symplectic%20geometry.pdf)

* Maxim Kontsevich, _Feynman diagrams and low-dimensional topology_, First European Congress of Mathematics, 1992, Paris, Volume II, Progress in Mathematics 120, Birkhauser 1994, 97-121, [pdf](http://193.51.104.7/~maxim/TEXTS/Feynman%20%20diagrams%20and%20low-dimensional%20topology.pdf)

* [[Victor Ginzburg]], Mikhail Kapranov, _Koszul duality for operads_, Duke Math. J. __76__ (1994),  no. 1, 203--272; reprint [arxiv/0709.1228](http://arxiv.org/abs/0709.1228); *Erratum to: Koszul duality for operads*, Duke Math. J. __80__ (1995),  no. 1, 293. 

* Victor Ginzburg, _Non-commutative symplectic geometry, quiver varieties, and operads_, Math. Res. Lett. __8__ (2001),  no. 3, 377--400, [math.QA/0005165](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0005165); _Lectures on noncommutative geometry_, [math.AG/0506603](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0506603)