#Idea#

The structure of a category $V$ with **interval object** is supposed to be the right structure to ensure 

1. that there is an object $I$ in $V$ such that for every object $X$ of $V$ the [[internal hom|internal hom object]] $[I,X]$ exists and behaves like a [[path object]] for $B$;

2. that there is a notion of composition on these path objects which induces on $[I,X]$ a structure of a (higher) category internal to $V$: the [[fundamental category]] or [[fundamental groupoid]] of the object $X$, or rather its [[fundamental infinity-groupoid]].

For instance the choice $V =$ [[Top]] and $I = [0,1]$ 
should be an instance of a category with interval object, and the fundamental $n$-groupoid $\Pi_n(X)$ obtained for any topological space $X$ from this data should be the fundamental $n$-groupoid as a [[Trimble n-category]].


We give two very similar definitions that differ only in some extra assumptions. 

* The first one was used by Berger and Moerdijk to generalize the Boardman–Vogt resolution of [[topological operad]]s to more general [[operad]]s. 

* The second is motivated from constructions appearing in the definitions of [[Trimble n-category]] and of [[generalized universal bundle]]. It includes the possibility that the interval is _not_ weakly equivalent to the point, in which case it may be used nontrivially to test for [[undirected object]]s and probe [[directed object]]s.



#Definition by Berger-Moerdijk#


In [section 4](http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/math/pdf/0502/0502155v2.pdf#page=11)
of

* Clemens Berger, Ieke Moerdijk, _The Boardman-Vogt resolution of operads in monoidal model categories_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.AT/0502155))

the following definition is given:

Let $V$ be a [[monoidal model category]] $V$ and write $pt$ for the tensor unit in $V$ (not necessarily the terminal object). 

In **segment** object $I$ in a [[monoidal model category]] $V$ is a factorization $pt \sqcup pt \stackrel{0 \sqcup 1}{\to} I \stackrel{\epsilon}{\to} pt$
of $pt \sqcup pt \stackrel{Id \sqcup Id}{\to} pt$ together with an associtive morphsim $\vee : I \otimes I \to I$ which has 0 as its _neutral_ and 1 as its _absorbing_ element, and for which $\epsilon$ is a counit.

A segment object is an  **interval** in $V$ if $0 \sqcup 1 : pt \sqcup pt \to I$ is a cofibration and $\epsilon : I \to pt$ a weak equivalence.


#Definition II#

The following definition is tentative. It arose from the discussion reproduced further below.

+--{.query}
Might there be two notions of interval object, one in a closed category such that $[I,B]$ is a path object, and one in a monoidal category such that $I \otimes B$ is a cylinder object? (And then a stronger notion, combining these, in a closed monoidal category.) —[[Toby Bartels|Toby]]

_[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]_: True, depending on application, one may be able to and want to drop some assumptions here. We might eventually give a layered definition, which adds assumptions step by step. 

But, on the other hand, the main purpose of the _interval object_ here, which goes beyond the idea for instance in a [[cylinder functor]] is that we want to induce for any object $B$ on the internal hom-object $(B_0 \leftarrow [I,B]\rightarrow B_0)$ the structure of a (homotopy coherent- or $A_\infty$-) internal category. Namely the fundamental category $\Pi_1(B)$. To get that we need both the closed and the monoidal and the homotopical structure. 

_Toby_: Actually, I wasn\'t so much thinking about weakening the requirements on $V$ (although admittedly I did phrase my question to include that).  My main point that they are, naïvely, two concepts: one that uses the closed structure to give path objects, and one that uses the monoidal structure to give cylinder objects.  So will we have interval objects, co-interval objects, and bi-interval objects?

=--

The following definition of category with interval object aims to abstract this construction away from $V = $ [[Top]] to other [[closed monoidal homotopical category|closed monoidal homotopical categories]].



A **category with interval object** is

* a symmetric [[closed monoidal homotopical category]] $V$;

* with tensor unit being the [[terminal object]], which we write $pt$;

* equipped with a [[bi-pointed object]] 
$$
  \array{
    && I
    \\
    & {}^\sigma \nearrow && \nwarrow^{\tau}
    \\
    pt &&&& pt
  }
$$

in $V$, with $I$ called the **interval object**;

such that

* the [[pushout]]
$$
  \array{
    && I^{\vee 2} := I \sqcup_{pt} I
    \\
    & \nearrow && \nwarrow
    \\
    I &&&& I
    \\
    & {}_{\tau}\nwarrow
    && \nearrow_{\sigma}
    \\
    && pt
  }
$$
exists in $V$, so that all compositions
$$
  \array{
    && I^{\vee n}
    \\
    & {}^\sigma \nearrow && \nwarrow^{\tau}
    \\
    pt &&&& pt
  }
$$
of $n \in \mathbb{N}$ copies of the [[co-span]] $I$ with itself by pushout over adjacent legs exist in $V$;

* and all $V$-objects of morphisms ${}_{pt}[I, I^{\vee n}]_{pt}$ of cospans (as described at [[co-span]]) are weakly equivalent to the point
 $$ 
   {}_{pt}[I, I^{\vee n}]_{pt}
   \,.
 $$


#Induced structure#

The above data induces the following further structure.

The collection of objects 
$\{ {}_{pt}[I, I^{\vee n}]_{pt}\}_{n \in \mathbb{N}}$ in a category with interval object naturally comes equipped with the structure of an [[operad]]: this is the tautological co-endomorphism [[operad]] on the object $I$ in the symmetric closed monoidal category of [[bi-pointed object]]s from $pt$ to $pt$. 

This induces in turn for all objects $X \in V$ on the object $[I,X]$ the structure of an operad, which is naturally interpreted as an internal $A_\infty$-[[A-infinity-category|category]] structure on

$$
  (X_0 := [pt,X]) 
  \stackrel{s := [\sigma,X]}{\leftarrow}  
  [I,X] 
  \stackrel{t := [\tau, X]}{\to} (X_0 := [pt,X])
  \,.  
$$

This internal $A_\infty$-category is denoted 

$$
  \Pi_1(X)
$$

and interpreted as the [[fundamental groupoid]] or rather, in general, the [[fundamental category]] of the object $B$ with respect to the interval object $I$ -- all internal to $V$.

Moreover, by iterating this process as described at [[Trimble n-category]] one should obtain, if everything goes through, on $X$ the structure of a [[Trimble n-category|Trimble]] $\omega$-[[infinity-category|category]] and indeed a functor

$$
  \Pi_\omega : V_0 \to Trimble \omega Cat
  \,.
$$

(... to be continued ...)

#Remarks#

* The condition that all ${}_{pt}[I, I^{\vee n}]_{pt}$ are contractible is the _coherence condition_ on all composition operations. 

* The above is _not_ demanding that the interval object $I$ itself is is weakly equivalent to the point. If it is, then $\Pi_1(X)$ is indeed a [[fundamental groupoid]]. If it is not, then $\Pi_1(X)$ may just be a [[fundamental category]].

* If $X_0$ has a notion of [[path object]] one may consider imposing the condition that $[I,X]$ is a path object of $X$ for all $X$. Similarly, if $V_0$ has a [[cylinder functor]], one may consider imposing the condition that it is given by $-\otimes I$.

#Examples#

* The **standard interval object** in [[Cat]] is the 1st [[oriental]] $\{0\to 1\}$ (see [[co-span co-trace]])

* For $V = C = Top$ with its standard model structure the standard topological closed interval  $I := [0,1]$ with $pt \stackrel{\sigma, \tau}{\to}$ the maps to 0 and 1, respectively. This is the case described in detail at [[Trimble n-category]].

* For $V = \omega Cat$ the category of [[strict omega-category|strict omega-categories]] the first [[oriental]], the 1-[[globe]] $I = \{a \to b\}$ is an interval object. In this strict case in fact all hom objects are already equal to the point ${}_{pt}[I, I^{\vee n}]_{pt} = pt$ and 
$$
  (X = [pt,X]) 
  \stackrel{s := [\sigma,X]}{\leftarrow}  
  [I,X] 
  \stackrel{t := [\tau, X]}{\to} (X = [pt,X])
$$
is a strict co-category internal to $\omega$Cat. 
In this case, for $X$ any $\omega$-category 
the $A_\infty$-category $\Pi_1(X)$ is just an ordinary category, namely the 1-category obtained from truncation of $X$. Similarly, probably $\Pi_\omega(X) = X$ in this case.





***

#Discussion#

We had originally started discussing the notion of interval objects at [[homotopy]] but then moved it to this entry here. The above entry grew out of the following discussion we had, together with discussion at [[Trimble n-category]].

_[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]:_ Let me chat a bit about what I am looking for here. It seems very useful to have a good notion of what it means in a context like a [[closed category|closed]] [[category of fibrant objects]] to say that _[[path object]]s are compatibly corepresented_.

By this should be meant: there exists an object $I$ such that

* for $B$ any other object, $[I,B]$ is a path object;

* and such that $I$ has some structure and property which makes it "nice".

In something I am thinking about the main point of $I$ being _nice_ is that it can model compositon: it must be possible to put two intervals end-to-end and get an interval of twice the length. In some private notes [[schreiber:Nonabelian homotopical cohomology and fiber bundles|here]] I suggest that:

a "category with interval object" should be

* a [[closed monoidal homotopical category]]

* with a compatible structure of a [[category of fibrant objects]]

* and equipped with an **internal co-categoy** on $\sigma, \tau : pt \to I$ for $I$ the _interval object_;

* such that $I$ co-represents path objects, in that for all objects $B$, $[I,B]$ is a path object for $B$.

I think there are a bunch of obvious examples: all familiar models of higher groupoids (Kan complexes, $\omega$-groupoids etc.) with the interval object being the obvious cellular interval $\{a \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} c\}$.

I also describe one class of applications which I think this is needed/useful for: recall how Kenneth Brown in section 4 of his article on [[category of fibrant objects]] (see theorems recalled there and reference given there) describes fiber bundles in the abstract homotopy theory of a _pointed_ category of fibrant objects. This is pretty restrictive. In order to describe things like $\infty$-vector bundles in an context of [[enriched homotopy theory]] one must drop this assumption of the ambient category being pointed. The structure of it being a category with an interval object is just the necessary extra structure to still allow to talk of (principal and associated) fiber bundles in abstract homotopy theory. It seems.

Comments are very welcome.

_[[Todd Trimble|Todd]]_: The original "Trimblean" definition for weak $n$-categories (I called them "flabby" $n$-categories) crucially used the fact that in a nice category $Top$, we have a highly nontrivial $Top$-operad where the components have the form $\hom_{Top}(I, I^{\vee n})$, where $X \vee Y$ here denotes the cospan composite of two bipointed spaces (each seen as a cospan from the one-point space to itself), and the hom here is the internal hom between cospans. 

My comment is that the only thing that stops one from generalizing this to general (monoidal closed) model categories is that "usually" $I$ doesn't seem to be "nice" in your sense here, and so one doesn't get an interesting (nontrivial) operad when my machine is applied to the interval object. But I'm generally on the lookout for this sort of thing, and would be very interested in hearing from others if they have interesting examples of this.

[[Urs Schreiber]]: Thanks, Todd. I should have listed the examples I had in mind: I was thinking about 
[[strict omega-category]] here, where the 1st [[oriental]]
$G_1 = I = \{a \to b\}$ should naturally be an internal 
co-category, where co-composition is the functor which
sends $a \to b$ to the composite $a_1 \to (b_1 = a_2) \to a_2$.

More generally, there are, I think $n$ different co-category
structures on the standard $n$-globe, with co-source and
co-target given by the two injections of the standard
$(k \lt n)$-globe. 

The composition operations in the internal hom 
$\omega$-category $hom(C,D)$ in strict $\omega$-categories can,  I'd think, then be thought of as coming from the image of these co-categories under
$Hom(C\otimes -, D)$.

A description of what I just tried to say with the illuminating diagrams is on [p. 35 here](http://ncatlab.org/schreiber/files/nacq.pdf#page=35).
Hope I got this right. Please let me know if I am mixed up.

_[[Todd Trimble|Todd]]_: It seems to me there might be some trickiness about which hom you want. The thing you're proposing sounds like it would work to describe the hom for $\omega$-Cat as a cartesian closed category, but I'm not sure off the bat how it will play out with respect to the Crans-Gray monoidal biclosed structure. I'd have to think about it more carefully, but there's something a little "thin" about the strict co-category structure on say the category 2 (as an interval co-category in $Cat$) which makes me wonder.

(After an email from Urs:) I think Urs is right after all -- this should work fine for either monoidal structure. 

_[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]_: Also by email, Todd points out that of course more generally, we want our interval objects to form internal co-categories only _up to coherent homotopy_, because otherwise the example of $G_1$ in strict $\omega$-categories is likely to be essentially the only good example.  We want internal _homotopy co-categories_.

I need to learn more about how one would go about systematically defining concepts internal to a model category up to homotopy. What are the available tools for handling higher coherent homotopies in an arbitrary model category?

My understanding is that Todd is going to write an entry on the Trimble definition of $\infty$-categories, and that this  issue appears there in some guise. So maybe I'll just wait for Todd's entry to appear...
