
> For special kinds of units see also _[[unit of an adjunction]]_ and _[[unit of a monad]]_. Different (but related) is _[[physical unit]]_.

****

# Units
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A unit is a [[quantity]] $u$ such that every other quantity (of a certain type) is a multiple (in a certain sense) of $u$.


## Definitions

Exactly what this means depends on context.  A very general definition is this:

Given [[sets]] $R$ and $M$, and a [[function]] ${\cdot}\colon R \times M \to M$, an [[element]] $u$ of $M$ is a __unit__ (relative to the operation ${\cdot}$) if, given any element $x$ of $M$, there exists a unique element $a$ of $R$ such that $x = a \cdot u$.

That is, every element of $M$ is a multiple (in a unique way) of $u$, where 'multiple' is defined in terms of the operation ${\cdot}$.


### Units in rings

If $R$ is a [[ring]] (or [[rig]]), then $R$ comes equipped with a multiplication map ${\cdot}\colon R \times R \to R$.  So $R$ can play the role of both $R$ and $M$ above, although there are two ways to do this: on the left and on the right.

We find that $u$ is a __left unit__ if and only if $u$ has a [[left inverse]], and $u$ is a __right unit__ if and only if $u$ has a [[right inverse]].  First, an element $u$ with an inverse is a unit because, given any element $x$, we have
$$ x = (x u^{-1}) u $$
(on the left) or
$$ x = u (u^{-1} x) $$
(on the right).  Conversely, a unit must have an inverse, since there must a solution to
$$ 1 = a u $$
(on the left) or
$$ 1 = u a $$
(on the right).

In a [[commutative ring]] (or rig), a __unit__ is an element of $R$ that has an [[inverse element|inverse]], period.  Of course, a commutative ring $R$ is a [[field]] just when every non-[[zero]] element is a unit.


### Units in monoids

Notice that addition plays no role in the characterisation above of a unit in a ring.  Accordingly, a unit in a [[monoid]] may be defined in precisely the same way.

A [[group]] is precisely a monoid in which every element is a unit.


### Units in rngs or semigroups

In a [[rng]] (or, ignoring addition, in a [[semigroup]]), we cannot speak of inverses of elements.  However, we can still talk about units; $u$ is a __left unit__ if, for every $x$, there is an $a$ such that
$$ x = a u ;$$
and $u$ is a __right unit__ if, for every $x$, there is an $a$ such that
$$ x = u a .$$


### Units in nonassocative rings or magmas

In a [[nonassociative algebra|nonassociative ring]] (or, ignoring addition, in a [[magma]]), even if we have an identity element, an invertible element might not be a unit.  So we must use the same explicit definition as in a rng (or semigroup) above.

A [[quasigroup]] is precisely a magma in which every element is a two-sided unit.


### Units in modules

If $R$ is a [[ring]] (or [[rig]]) and $M$ an $R$-[[module]], then a __unit__ in $M$ is an element $u \in M$ such that every other $x \in M$ can be written as $x = a u$ (or $x = u a$ for a right module) for some $a \in R$.  This is the same as a [[generator]] of $M$ as an $R$-module.  There is no need to distinguish left and right units unless $M$ is a [[bimodule]].  Note that a (left or right) unit in $R$ _qua_ ring is the same as a unit in $R$ _qua_ (left or right) $R$-module.


### Units of measurement

In [[physics]], the quantities of a given dimension generally form an $\mathbb{R}$-[[line]], a $1$-dimensional [[vector space]] over the [[real numbers]].  Since $\mathbb{R}$ is a field, any non-[[zero]] quantity is a unit, called in this context a __unit of measurement__.  This is actually a special case of a unit in a module, where $R \coloneqq \mathbb{R}$ and $M$ is the line in question.

Often (but not always) these quantities form an [[orientation|oriented]] line, so that nonzero quantities are either positive or negative.  Then we usually also require a unit of measurement to be positive.  In fact, for some dimensions, there is no physical meaning to a negative quantity, in which case the quantities actually form a module over the rig $\mathbb{R}_{\ge 0}$ and every nonzero element is "positive."

For example, the [[kilogram]] is a unit of mass, because any mass may be expressed as a real multiple of the kilogram.  Further, it is a positive unit; the mass of any physical object is a nonnegative quantity (so that mass quantities actually form an $\mathbb{R}_{\ge 0}$-module) and may be expressed as a nonnegative real multiple of the kilogram.


## Identities as units

Often the term 'unit' (or 'unity') is used as a synonym for '[[identity element]]', especially when this identity element is denoted $1$.  For example, a 'ring with unit' (or 'ring with unity') is a ring with an identity (used by authors who say 'ring' for a rng).  Of course, a rng with identity has a unit, since $1$ itself is a unit; conversely, a commutative rng with a unit must have an identity.
+-- {: .query}
I haven\'t managed to find either a proof or a counterexample to the converse (in the noncommutative case): that a rng with a unit must have an identity.

Response: If $R$ is a rng with a unit $u$, then every element uniquely factors through $u$. In particular, $u$ itself does. $u = a u$, with $a$ unique. So $a$ is an identity.

Reply: Why is $a$ an identity then?  This works if the rng is commutative: given any $v$, write $v$ as $b u$, and then $a v = a (b u) = b (a u) = b u = v$.  But without commutativity (and associativity), this doesn\'t work.
=--

It is this meaning of 'unit' which gives rise to the [[unit of an adjunction]].


## Related concepts

* [[unit object]]

* [[unit of an adjunction]]

* [[unit of a monad]]


[[!redirects unit]]
[[!redirects units]]

[[!redirects unit of measurement]]
[[!redirects unit of measurements]]
[[!redirects units of measurement]]
[[!redirects units of measurements]]
