pages/478.md, before:


# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

In natural language, the definite article ('the' in English) is generally used only for nouns which are uniquely characterized by context.  Hence we have "the United States of America" and "the book I was just reading," but only "a car" or "a wild late-night party." (Sometimes "the book I was just reading" is abbreviated to "the book", but it should be clear from context that only one book could be meant.)

In [[mathematics]], and especially in [[category theory]], [[homotopy theory]] and [[higher category theory]], it is common to use "the" more generally for something which is characterized uniquely up to unique [[coherence|coherent]] [[isomorphism]] (that is, a unique isomorphism appropriate given the context).  

Thus, for instance, we speak (assuming that any exists) of "the" [[terminal object]] of a category, "the" [[product]] of two objects, "the" [[adjoint functor|left adjoint]] of a functor, and so on.  Outside of pure [[category theory]] we have examples such as "the" Dedekind-complete ordered field (the field of [[real numbers]]).

In [[higher category theory]], we extend this usage to objects that are characterized uniquely up to unique coherent [[equivalence]].  Of course, by "unique equivalence" we mean "unique up to 2-equivalence," and so on.  A more [[homotopy theory|homotopy-theoretic]] way to say this is that _the space ($\infty$-[[infinity-groupoid|groupoid]]) of all such objects is [[contractible space|contractible]]_.


## Formalization

The notion of a "generalized the" can be formalized and treated uniformly in [[homotopy type theory]]. Here one can define an [[natural deduction|introduction rule]] for *the* as follows:

$$
  (A:Type),(t:IsContr(A)) \vdash (the(A,t):A).
$$

Here the [[term]] $t$ is one witness for the [[contractible type|contractibility]] of the [[type]] $A$. Since $IsContr(A)$ is itself [contractible](contractible+type#properties_18), we could say that $t$ is *the* witness for the contractibility of the type $A$, which may explain why we do not generally mention it.

If we wish to extend this treatment to types which are [[propositions]], we might call such types $FactThat(P)$, for some statement $P$. Then if $P$ holds, we can introduce a term $the(FactThat(P))$.

[[!redirects the]]
[[!redirects generalised the]]
[[!redirects generalized the]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 106063 Revision date: 2016-02-29 03:36:58 Page name: generalized the Author: David Corfield IP address: 129.12.18.187

pages/478.md, after:


# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

In natural language, the definite article ('the' in English) is generally used only for nouns which are uniquely characterized by context.  Hence we have "the United States of America" and "the book I was just reading," but only "a car" or "a wild late-night party." (Sometimes "the book I was just reading" is abbreviated to "the book", but it should be clear from context that only one book could be meant.)

In [[mathematics]], and especially in [[category theory]], [[homotopy theory]] and [[higher category theory]], it is common to use "the" more generally for something which is characterized uniquely up to unique [[coherence|coherent]] [[isomorphism]] (that is, a unique isomorphism appropriate given the context).  

Thus, for instance, we speak (assuming that any exists) of "the" [[terminal object]] of a category, "the" [[product]] of two objects, "the" [[adjoint functor|left adjoint]] of a functor, and so on.  Outside of pure [[category theory]] we have examples such as "the" Dedekind-complete ordered field (the field of [[real numbers]]).

In [[higher category theory]], we extend this usage to objects that are characterized uniquely up to unique coherent [[equivalence]].  Of course, by "unique equivalence" we mean "unique up to 2-equivalence," and so on.  A more [[homotopy theory|homotopy-theoretic]] way to say this is that _the space ($\infty$-[[infinity-groupoid|groupoid]]) of all such objects is [[contractible space|contractible]]_.


## Formalization

The notion of a "generalized the" can be formalized and treated uniformly in [[homotopy type theory]]. Here one can define an [[natural deduction|introduction rule]] for *the* as follows:

$$
  (A:Type),(t:IsContr(A)) \vdash (the(A,t):A).
$$

Here the [[term]] $t$ is one witness for the [[contractible type|contractibility]] of the [[type]] $A$. Since $IsContr(A)$ is itself [contractible](contractible+type#properties_18), we could say that $t$ is *the* witness for the contractibility of the type $A$, which may explain why we do not generally mention it.

If we wish to extend this treatment to types which are [[propositions]], we might call such types $FactThat(P)$, for some statement $P$. Then if $P$ holds, we can introduce a term $the(FactThat(P))$.

##References

* [[David Corfield]], _Expressing 'The Structure of' in Homotopy Type Theory_, [pdf](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/16936016/The_Structure.pdf)

[[!redirects the]]
[[!redirects generalised the]]
[[!redirects generalized the]]
