
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Functorial quantum field theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functorial quantum field theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[quantum field theory]] what has come to be known as the _holographic principle_ is the fact that the [[partition function]]s of some [[quantum field theories]] of [[dimension]] $n$ may be identified with [[state]] of QFTs in dimension $n + 1$:


## Examples

### Poisson $\sigma$-model / quantum mechanics

Ordinary [[quantum mechanics]] induced by [[quantization]] of a [[Poisson manifold]] -- which may be regarded as a 1-dimensional QFT -- is holographically dual to the 2-dimensional [[Poisson sigma-model]] 
(implicitly observed by ([Kontsevich](#Kontsevich)) made explicit by ([CattaneoFelder](#CattaneoFelder)).

### A-model / quantum mechanics

Similarly the [[A-model]] on certain [[D-brane]]s gives a holographic description of ordinary [[quantum mechanics]]. ([Witten](#WittenAModel)).

See

* [[quantization via the A-model]]

### Chern-Simons theory / WZW-model

3-dimensional Chern-Simons theory for a group $G$ is holographically dual to the 2-dimensional [[WZW-model]].

### Higher dimensional Chern-Simons theory / Self-dual higher gauge theory

Generally, [[higher dimensional Chern-Simons theory]]
in dimension $4k+3$ (for $k \in \mathbb{N}$) is holograohically related to [[self-dual higher gauge theory]] in dimension $4k+2$ (at least in the abelian case). See there for more details.

### Ads/CFT

Conjecturally, [[type II string theory]] on a [[anti-de Sitter space]] background is holographically dual to [[super Yang-Mills theory]] on the asymptotic boundary.

See [[AdS/CFT correspondence]].



## Related concepts

* [[holographic principle of higher category theory]]


## References

### Self-dual higher gauge fields and higher abelian Chern-Simons

The idea of describing [[self-dual higher gauge theory]] by abelian Chern-Simons theory in one dimension higher originates in 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Five-brane effective action in M-Theory_, J. Geom. Phys. __22__ (1997), no. 2, 103–133, [hep-th/9610234](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9610234)

* [[Edward Witten]], _Duality relations among topological effects in string theory_, J. High Energy Phys. 2000, no. 5, Paper 31, 31 pp. [arXiv:hep-th/9912086](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9912086), [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2000/05/031)

More discussion of the general principle is in 

* Dmitriy Belov, [[Greg Moore]], _Holographic action for the self-dual field_, [arXiv:hep-th/0605038](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0605038)

A quick exposition of the basic idea is in

* [[Jacques Distler]], _Actions for self-dual gauge fields_ ([blog](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/~distler/blog/archives/000809.html))

The application of this to the description of type II [[string theory]] in 10-dimensions to 11-dimensional Chern-Simons theory is in the followup 

* Dmitriy Belov, [[Greg Moore]], _Type II Actions from 11-Dimensional Chern-Simons Theories_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0611020))

### Poisson $\sigma$-model/A-model and quantum mechanics

* [[Maxim Kontsevich]], ...
 {#Kontsevich}

* [[Alberto Cattaneo]], [[Giovanni Felder]], ...
 {#CattaneoFelder}

* [[Edward Witten]], ...
 {#WittenAModel}

### For Chern-Simons theory / 2d CFT

3-dimensional [[Chern-Simons theory]] in the context of holography is discussed for instance in

* Victor O. Rivelles, _Holographic Principle and AdS/CFT Correspondence_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9912139))

* [[Anton Kapustin]], [[Natalia Saulina]], _Surface operators in 3d TFT and 2d Rational CFT_ in [[Hisham Sati]], [[Urs Schreiber]] (eds.) _[[schreiber:Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Field and Perturbative String Theory]]_ AMS, 2011
* R. Bousso, _The holographic principle_, Rev. Mod. Phys. __74__ (2002) 825-874, [MR2003m:83048](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=1925130), [doi](http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.74.825)

### General abstract formulation

An identification of boundary conditions and [[QFT with defects|defects]] as [[natural transformation]]s between higher dimensional [[FQFT]]s is discussed in

* [[Chris Schommer-Pries]], _Topological defects and classifying local topological field theories in low dimension_ ([[SchommerPriesDefects.pdf:file]])
{#SchommerPries}

See [[holographic principle in higher category theory]] for more on this.