+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Foundations
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include foundations - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

In [[logic]], the principle of **excluded middle** states that every [[truth value]] is either true or false. (This is sometimes called the '[[axiom]]' or 'law' of excluded middle, either to emphasise that it is or is not optional; 'principle' is a relatively neutral term.) One of the many meanings of [[classical logic]] is to emphasise that this principle holds in the logic; in contrast, it fails in [[intuitionistic logic]].

The principle of excluded middle (hereafter, PEM), as a statement about truth values themselves, is accepted by nearly all mathematicians; those who doubt or deny it are a distinct minority, the [[constructive mathematics|constructivists]]. However, when one [[internalization|internalises]] mathematics in categories other than [[Set|the category of sets]], there is no doubt, though, that excluded middle often fails [[internal logic|internally]]. See the examples listed at [[internal logic]]. (Those categories in which excluded middle holds are called [[Boolean category|Boolean]]; in general, the adjective 'Boolean' is often used to indicate the applicability of PEM.)

Although the term 'excluded middle' (sometimes even _excluded third_) suggests that the principle does not apply in many-valued logics, that is not the point; many-valued logics are many-valued *externally* but may still be two-valued *internally*.  In the language of [[categorial logic]], whether a category has exactly two [[subterminal objects]] is in general independent of whether it is Boolean; instead, the category is Boolean iff the statement that it has exactly two subterminal objects holds in its [[internal logic]] (which is in general independent of whether that statement is true).

In fact, intuitionistic logic proves that there is no truth value that is neither true nor false; in this sense, the possibility of a 'middle' or 'third' truth value is still 'excluded'.  But since the relevant [[de Morgan law]] fails in intuitionistic logic, we may not conclude that every truth value is either true or false, which is the actual PEM.


## PEM versus AC 

Excluded middle can be seen as a very weak form of the [[axiom of choice]] (a slightly more controversial principle, doubted or denied by a slightly larger minority, and true internally in even fewer categories).  In fact, the following are equivalent.

1. The principle of excluded middle.
1. [[finite set|Finitely indexed]] sets are [[projective object|projective]] (in fact, it suffices 2-indexed sets to be projective).
1. [[finite set|Finite sets]] are [[choice object|choice]] (in fact, it suffices for 2 to be choice).

(Here, a set $A$ is **finite** or **finitely-indexed** (respectively) if, for some natural number $n$, there is a bijection or surjection (respectively) $\{0, \ldots, n - 1\} \to A$.)

The proof is as follows.  If $p$ is a truth value, then divide $\{0,1\}$ by the equivalence relation where $0 \equiv 1$ iff $p$ holds.  Then we have a surjection $2\to A$, whose domain is $2$ (and in particular, finite), and whose codomain $A$ is finitely-indexed.  But this surjection splits iff $p$ is true or false, so if either $2$ is choice or $2$-indexed sets are projective, then PEM holds.

On the other hand, if PEM holds, then we can show by induction that if $A$ and $B$ are choice, so is $A\sqcup B$ (add details).  Thus, all finite sets are choice.  Now if $n\to A$ is a surjection, exhibiting $A$ as finitely indexed, it has a section $A\to n$.  Since a finite set is always projective, and any retract of a projective object is projective, this shows that $A$ is projective.

In particular, the axiom of choice implies PEM.  This argument, due originally to Diaconescu, can be internalized in any [[topos]]. However, other weak versions of choice such as [[countable choice]] (any surjection to a countable set (which for this purpose is any set isomorphic to the set of natural numbers) has a section), [[dependent choice]], or even [[COSHEP]] do not imply PEM. In fact, it is often claimed that axiom of choice is *true* in constructive mathematics (by the BHK or [[Brouwer-Heyting-Kolmogorov interpretation]] of predicate logic), leading to much argument about exactly what that means.

## Double-negated PEM
 {#DoubleNegatedPEM}

While PEM is not valid in constructive mathematics, its double negation 

$$ \neg\neg(A\vee \neg A)$$

is valid.  Ony way to see this is to note that $\neg (A\vee B) = \neg A \wedge \neg B$ is one of [[de Morgan's laws]] that is constructively valid, and $\neg (\neg A \wedge \neg\neg A)$ is easy to prove (it is an instance of the [[law of non-contradiction]]).

However, a more direct argument makes the structure of the proof more clear.  When [[beta-reduced]], the [[proof term]] is $\lambda x. x(inr(\lambda a. x(inl(a))))$.   This means that we first assume $\neg (A\vee \neg A)$ for a contradiction, for which it suffices (by assumption) to prove $A\vee \neg A$.  We prove that by proving $\neg A$, which we prove by assuming $A$ for a contradiction.  But now we can reach a contradiction by invoking (again) our assumption of $\neg (A\vee \neg A)$ and proving $A\vee \neg A$ this time using our new assumption of $A$.  In other words, we start out claiming that $\neg A$, but whenever that "bluff gets called" by someone supplying an $A$ and asking us to yield a contradiction, we retroactively change our minds and claim that $A$ instead, using the $A$ that we were just given as evidence.

In particular, this shows how the [[double negation]] [[modality]] can be regarded computationally as a sort of [[continuation-passing]] transform.

## Related concepts

* [[axiom of choice]]

## References

### General

### In homotopy type theory
 {#ReferencesInHomotopyTypeTheory}

In [[homotopy type theory]]

* [[Univalent Foundations Project]], section 3.5 _[[Homotopy Type Theory -- Univalent Foundations of Mathematics]]_

category: foundational axiom

[[!redirects Excluded Middle]]
[[!redirects excluded middle]]
[[!redirects law of excluded middle]]
[[!redirects the law of excluded middle]]
[[!redirects principle of excluded middle]]
[[!redirects the principle of excluded middle]]
[[!redirects axiom of excluded middle]]
[[!redirects the axiom of excluded middle]]
