
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### $(0,1)$-Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include (0,1)-category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Modal Logics
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

The term _modal logic_ refers to an enrichment of standard formal [[logic]] where the standard operations ([[and]], [[or]], [[not]], and perhaps [[universal quantifier|forall]], etc.) are accompanied by certain extra operations -- called _modal operators_ and often denoted by "$\Box$" or similar -- such that for $p$ any [[proposition]] the expression $\Box p$ is a new proposition whose interpretation is roughly as "$p$ holds (only) in some _mode_" or "$p$ holds (only) _in a certain way_", such as: "$p$ is _possibly_ true", "$p$ will _eventually become_ true", "$p$ is _believed_ to be true", etc. 

There is no established axiom set that an operator on propositions has to satisfy to count as a _modal operator_ . As a result, for instance in the preface of ([Blackburn-deRijke-Venema](#BlackburnDeRijkeVenema)) et al.) it says

>_'Ask three modal logicians what modal logic is, and you are likely to get at least three different answers'_.

Hence there is a good bit of flexibility in the notion _modal logic_, as shown by the list of examples below. But often the modal operators are in fact [[monad (in computer science)|(co)monads]] on the universe of propositions. For more on this see at _[modal type theory -- Relation to monads](modal%20type%20theory#RelationToMonads)_.

The classic example of a modal logic is a system, called _[[S4 modal logic]]_, that aims to model the idea of propositions being "possibly true" or "necessarily true". 

We list and discuss examples of modal logic in more detial below in _[Examples](#Examples)_. 

Modal logics have [[semantics]] in terms of sets with [[relations]], called _[[Kripke frames]]_ in the context of modal logic.  For instance, [[temporal logic|temporal logics]] have [[posets]] as [[models]].



## Definition

### Modal Languages
{#modal+language}

Modal logics are built on **modal languages**, that is the usual propositional language plus those extra modalities. The way the modalities work has to be laid down in an axiom system for the logic in question, for instance, for the temporal logic we might require an axiom saying
'If $F F\phi$ is true, then $F\phi$ is true', which will read a 'if it is going be true in the future that $\phi$ is going to be true in the future, then ...', see [[temporal logic]].  (Is this going to be something what we might want in 'provability logic'; is it the case that we should expect that if it is provable that something is provable then that something must be itself provable. This concentrates the modelling process on exactly how we wish to have our 'context' to behave.) In this way the relational nature of a context that we are looking at can get encoded into the logic.


Modal languages add one or more modal operator, often denoted $\square$ or $\Diamond$ into the usual [[propositional logics]]. (For the moment, we will keep things fairly simple so assume these to  be unary operators and we will not be considering operators that have more than one input, for the moment at least. The general case will be considered later on, but in any case is discussed in detail in some of the books on modal logic listed below.)

We will give a modal language with $n$ modal operators, $\Diamond_i$, $i = 1,\ldots, n$, which can  be applied to propositions of the language to form new propositions.  If $n=1$, we will refer to the language, defined below,  as the _basic modal language_.

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

We suppose given a set of variables, the _$n$-operator basic modal language_, $\mathcal{L}_\omega(n)$, given by  

$$\phi ::= p_\lambda \mid \bot \mid \neg \phi \mid \phi_1 \vee \phi_2 \mid \Diamond_i\phi,$$  

where the $p_\lambda$ are the propositional variables ordered by finite ordinals, $\lambda$, and, as usual, $\Diamond_i$ is a modality for each  $i=1, \ldots , n$.  

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

This form of definition needs a bit of interpreting if you have not met it before.  It gives a way of deciding if a formula is 'well-formed'.  The well formed formulae of  $\mathcal{L}_\omega(n)$ are defined as follows: A formula is either

   * a proposition variable, 

   * the propositional constant $\bot$, that is _falsum_, 

   * a negated formula,

   * a disjunction of two formulae, or

   * a formula prefixed by one of the diamonds / modal operators.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The basic modal language will be $\mathcal{L}_\omega(1)$.  We will sometimes write $Prop$ for the set of propositional variables / atomic formulae or whatever other reasonable term is used in a context.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The interpretation of $\Diamond \phi$ depends on the context (to some extent), but in the initial form here it is usually said to mean 'possibly $\phi$'.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

Some authors use an equivalent generation rule using $\square \phi$, which is $\neg \Diamond \neg \phi$. Of course, this interprets as 'necessarily $\phi$' in this initial form.  In [[epistemic logic]] the basic modal language interprets $\square \phi$ as saying 'the agent knows that $\phi$'.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

Other formulations replace $\vee$ and $\neg$ by implication $\phi_1\to \phi_2$, or by $\wedge$ and $\neg$.

=--

### Modal logics

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A **modal logic** in $\mathcal{L}_\omega(n)$ is any set $\Lambda$ of $\mathcal{L}_\omega(n)$-formulae such that   

* $\Lambda$ includes all $\mathcal{L}_\omega(n)$-formulae that are instances of tautologies, 
 
and

* $\Lambda$ is closed under the inference rule 
_if $\phi$, $\phi\to \psi \in \Lambda$ then $\psi \in \Lambda$_ , i.e. detachment or __modus ponens__.

=--

One of the basic axiom systems leads to _[[normal modal logics]]_. 

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition
**(deducibility)**

Suppose given a [[normal modal logic]], $\Lambda$ in $\mathcal{L}_\omega(n)$.  A formula $\phi$ is **$\Lambda$-deducible** from a set, $\Gamma$ of formulae, if there are finitely many formulae $\psi_0,\ldots,\psi_m\in \Gamma$ such that 

$$\vdash_\Lambda (\psi_0\to (\psi_1\to (\ldots \to (\psi_m\to \phi)\ldots)$$

that is the formula $(\psi_0\to (\psi_1\to (\ldots \to (\psi_m\to \phi)\ldots)$ is in $\Lambda$.

=--


+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

As the set of all formulae in $\mathcal{L}_\omega(n)$ satisfies the conditions for a logic and any intersection of logics is itself also a logic, we have that given a set of formulae decreed to be 'axioms' for a logic, there is a smallest modal logic containing them.
 
=--

## Examples
 {#Examples}

Here is a brief list of flavors of modal logic. More details are discussed below.


*  [[epistemic logics]]: it is known to $X$ that, it is common knowledge that (see [below](#EpistemicLogic) for more);

*  [[dynamic logic]]: after the program/computation/action finishes, the program enables, throughout the computation;

* tense logic: henceforth, eventually, hitherto, previously, now, tomorrow, yesterday, since, until, inevitably, finally, ultimately, endlessly, it will have been, it is being ...

* deontic logic: it is obligatory/forbidden/permitted/unlawful that 


* doxastic logic: it is believed that

* [[Lawvere-Tierney topology|geometric logic]]: it is locally the case that

* metalogic: it is valid/satisfiable/provable/consistent that ([Goldblatt](#Goldblatt)).

  The metalogical version was important in the [history of modern modal logic](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-modal-origins/). Gödel played an important role there. 



*  [[temporal logic|temporal logics]];


*  [[arrow structures|arrow logics]];

*  [[provability logics]]



### Epistemic logic
 {#EpistemicLogic}


Epistemic modalities are captured in [[epistemic logic|epistemic modal logic]], where necessity is interpreted as saying _"I know that proposition $\phi$ is true"_, and in 'provability logic', the basic modal operator interprets  as _"it is provable that $\phi$"_. If we have the basic temporal logic, then there is a future truth operator, so that $F\phi$ is intended to mean _'' $\phi$ will be true at some future time"_, and also a past operator $P$ so $P\phi$ is intended to mean "$\phi$ was true at some past time". 


Notice that the notions of _possibility_ and _necessity_ have different senses in ordinary language. For example, if we say ‘$P$ is possible’, we may mean that $P$ is: *epistemically* possible, not ruled out by anything I know; *physically* possible, not ruled out by the laws of physics; *logically* possible, not ruled out by the laws of logic. Some suggest that there is a further type of possibility, *metaphysical* possibility intermediate between logical and physical possibility. Metaphysical possibility would allow that different laws of physics might apply. 


* [[epistemic logic]]

  * [[the logic K(m)|K(m)]];

  * [[the logic T(m)|T(m)]];

  * [[the logic S4(m)|S4(m)]];

  * [[the logic S5(m)|S5(m)]].

 


## Semantics 

We discuss the [[semantics]] of modal logics, its [[models]].

### In Kripke frames / relational structures

The usual [[semantics]] of modal languages is in terms of [[frame (modal logic)|frames]], and this is where the link with relational structures comes in. (These are quite often called 'Kripke frames' as Kripke was one of the first to use relational semantics in this context. 

A discussion of the history can be found in  ([BlackburnDeRijkeVenema, page 42](#BlackburnDeRijkeVenema)). 

(As there is another sense to [[frame]] as the dual of a [[locale]], we need to consider the terminology here and where necessary will use [[frame (modal logic)]] as the entry name.) A more detailed discussion of [[frame (modal logic)|frames]], models and the whole question of the semantics of modal logics is to be found at that entry. 

Modal logics are thus also the logics of [[relational structures]], in fact,   Blackburn et al (see references) have as their first slogan: **Modal languages are simple but expressive languages for talking about relational structures.**
The temporal logic that satisfies the axiom $(4)$ has models that are [[posets]], for instance, whilst many of the [[epistemic logics]] have models which are sets with equivalence relations on them. In each case, the idea is that the relational structure gives all the possible states of some system and the modal logic describes that system. This explains the great interest in computer science and artificial intelligence of applications of modal logics.



###Algebraic semantics
{#AlgebraicSemantics}

The usual algebraic semantics of modal logic is in terms of Boolean algebras with operators and is described in the entry [[algebraic models for modal logic]].


### Categorical semantics
 {#CategoricalSemantics}

Every [[category]] comes with its [[internal logic]]. Modal operators in this internal logic can at least sometimes be identified with (co)reflectors into specified [[reflective subcategory|(co)reflective subcategories]]. See at _[[modal type theory]]_ for more on this.

Examples for this are [[local toposes]] and [[cohesive toposes]]. See there for more details.

## Related concepts

* [[modal type theory]]

* [[algebraic model for modal logic]]

* [[geometric model for modal logic]]

## References
 {#References}

General texts on modal logics include

* [[Patrick Blackburn]], M. de Rijke and [[Yde Venema]], _Modal Logic_, Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 53, 2001.
 {#BlackburnDeRijkeVenema}

* [[Marcus Kracht]], _Tools and Techniques in Modal Logic,_ Studies in Logic and the Foundation of Mathematics, 142, Elsevier, 1999.

* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, _[modal logic](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-modal/)_ 

A formulation of modal logic in terms of [[type|typing]] [[judgements]] and  [[type formation rules]] is in 

* [[Frank Pfenning]], Rowan Davies, _A judgemental reconstruction of modal logic_ (2000) ([pdf](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~fp/papers/mscs00.pdf))
 {#Pfenning-Davies}




### Coalgebraic modal logic

Discussion of modal logic in terms of [[coalgebra]] and [[terminal coalgebra of an endofunctor]] is in 

* Corina Cirstea1, Alexander Kurz, Dirk Pattinson, Lutz Schröder and Yde Venema, _Modal logics are coalgebraic_ ([pdf](http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/267144/1/ModalCoalgRev.pdf))

### History

* Goldblatt, _Mathematical Modal Logic: a View of its Evolution_ ([pdf](homepages.mcs.vuw.ac.nz/~rob/papers/modalhist.pdf))
 {#Goldblatt}

* [history of modern modal logic](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-modal-origins/)



[[!redirects modal logic]]
[[!redirects modal logics]]
[[!redirects modality]]
[[!redirects modalities]]
[[!redirects modal operator]]
[[!redirects modal operators]]
