
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition

A **finite topological space** is a [[topological space]] whose underlying [[set]] is a [[finite set]].

=--


## Properties

Finite topological spaces are [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] to finite [[preordered sets]], by the [[specialisation order]].

+-- {: .un_theorem}
###### Theorem

Finite topological spaces have the same _[[weak homotopy equivalence|weak]]_ [[homotopy type]] as finite [[simplicial complexes]] / finite [[CW-complexes]].

=--

This is due to [McCord](#McCord). For example, if $\mathbf{2}$ is [[Sierpinski space]] (two points $0$, $1$ and three opens $\emptyset$, $\{1\}$, and $\{0, 1\}$), then the continuous map $I = [0, 1] \to \mathbf{2}$ taking $0$ to $0$ and $t \gt 0$ to $1$ is a weak homotopy equivalence. For any finite topological space $X$ with specialization order $\mathcal{O}(X)$, the topological [[interval]] map $I \to \mathbf{2}$ induces a weak homotopy equivalence $B\mathcal{O}(X) \to X$: 

$$B\mathcal{O}(X) = \int^{[n] \in \Delta} Cat([n], \mathcal{O}(X)) \cdot Int([n], I) \to \int^{[n] \in \Delta} Cat([n], \mathcal{O}(X)) \cdot Int([n], \mathbf{2}) \cong X$$ 

(where we implicitly identify $\Delta^{op}$ with the category $Int$ of finite intervals with distinct top and bottom). 

On the other hand, any finite simplicial complex $X$ is homotopy equivalent to its [[barycentric subdivision]], which is the [[geometric realization]] of the [[poset]] of simplices ordered by inclusion. Thus finite posets model the weak homotopy types of finite simplicial complexes. 

## Examples

* [[pseudocircle]]

## References

A survey is in 

* Jonathan A. Barmak, _Topología Algebraica de Espacios Topológicos Finitos y Aplicaciones_ ([pdf](http://www.math.kth.se/~jbarmak/tesisfinal2.pdf))

The original results by McCord are in

* M.C. McCord. _Homotopy type comparison of a space with complexes associated with its open covers_ . Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 18 (1967), 705-708.
{#McCord}

* M.C. McCord. _Singular homology groups and homotopy groups of finite topological spaces_ , Duke Math. J. 33 (1966), 465-474. ([EUCLID](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.dmj/1077376525))


[[!redirects finite topological space]]
[[!redirects finite topological spaces]]
