

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Étale morphisms
+--{: .hide}
[[!include etale morphisms - contents]]
=--
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

A [[topological groupoid]] or [[Lie groupoid]] $C$ is called an **étale groupoid** if the [[domain|source]]-map $s : Mor C \to Obj C$ is a [[local homeomorphism]] or [[local diffeomorphism]], respectively, and hence exhibits the space of morphisms as an [[étale space]] over the space of objects.

It follows that all the other structure maps ([[codomain|target]], [[identity]], [[composition]]) are also local homeomorphisms, resp. local diffeomorphisms.

This means that we may regard an étale groupoid as an [[internal groupoid]] in the [[category]] whose objects are [[topological spaces]]/[[smooth manifold]]s and whose [[morphisms]] are local homeomorphisms/diffeomorphisms.

## Properties

### Cohomology and homology

In the literature one finds, roughly speaking, two different approaches to the study of étale groupoids. One approach is based on the construction of the convolution algebras associated to an étale groupoid, in the spirit of Connes' [[noncommutative geometry]], and involves the study of [[cyclic homology|cyclic]] and [[Hochschild homology]] and [[Hochschild cohomology|cohomology]] of these algebras. The other approach uses methods of algebraic topology such as the construction of the [[classifying space]] of an
étale groupoid and its [[abelian sheaf cohomology|(sheaf) cohomology groups]].

## Examples

&Eacute;tale groupoids arise naturally as models for [[leaf spaces]] of [[foliations]], for [[orbifold]]s, and for [[orbit spaces]] of [[discrete group]] [[actions]].


* Every [[topological space]] may be regarded as an étale groupoid with only identity morphisms.

* For $X$ a [[topological space]] and $\Gamma$ a [[discrete group]] with a continuous [[action]] $X \times \Gamma \to X$ on $X$, the [[action groupoid]] $X//\Gamma$ is étale.

* The [[Haefliger groupoid]] $\Gamma^q$ has the [[Cartesian space]] $\mathbb{R}^q$ as its space of objects. A [[morphism]] $x \to y$ is a [[germ]] of a [[diffeomorphism]] $(\mathbb{R}^q,x) \to (\mathbb{R}^q, y)$.

  This groupoid, and its [[geometric realization]] play a central role in [[foliation theory]].

* Every [[orbifold]] is an étale [[Lie groupoid]].

## Related concepts

* [[étale space]]

* [[orbifold]], [[Deligne-Mumford stack]]

* [[étale ∞-groupoid]]

* [[proper Lie groupoid]], [[effective Lie groupoid]]

## References

A standard textbook account is section 5.5. of 

* [[Ieke Moerdijk]], [[Janez Mrčun]], _Introduction to foliations and Lie groupoids_, Cambridge (2003)

See also at _[[orbifold]]_ for basic and introductory literature. 

Further discussion of étale groupoids and their properties is for instance in

* [[Marius Crainic]], [[Ieke Moerdijk]], _A Homology Theory for &Eacute;tale groupoids_ ([journal](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/K-theory/0284/))

* [[David Carchedi]], _Sheaf Theory for Étale Geometric Stacks_ ([arXiv:1011.6070](http://arxiv.org/abs/1011.6070))
  




[[!redirects étale groupoids]]

[[!redirects etale groupoid]]
[[!redirects etale groupoids]]

[[!redirects étale Lie groupoid]]
[[!redirects étale Lie groupoids]]

[[!redirects etale Lie groupoid]]
[[!redirects etale Lie groupoids]]
