
# Contents
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Temporal logics, as their name suggests, are logics that involve time.  They form a very large and important class of [[modal logics]], but here we will, to start with, only look at some simple cases. Temporal logics are very closely related to [[tense logic]]s.


## Basic temporal language, (BTL)

First the basic temporal language is built with two binary model operators, which instead of being denoted 'box' and 'diamond', are written $F$ and $P$.  The intended interpretation of these are:

* $F\phi$ is _$\phi$ will be true at some **future** time_;

* $P\phi$ is _$\phi$ was true at some **past** time.

The reason for the notation $F$ and $P$ should be clear.

* The dual of $F$ is $G$, so $G\phi = \neg F\neg \phi$. This means that we read $G\phi$ as 'at no future time is $\phi$ not true', i.e., $\phi$ is always **going** to be true. ($G$ for 'going'.)

* The dual of $P$ is written $H$, whence $H\phi = \neg P\neg \phi$ and $H\phi$ interprets as '$\phi$ **has** always been true'. ($H$ is for 'has' - which is a bit weak, but that is life!)

+-- {: . un_example}
###### Examples

*  If for all $\phi$ we have $P\phi \to G P\phi$, then _whatever has happened will always have happened_, which seems reasonable so this might be a suitable 'general truth' we might want a temporal logic to contain.

*  If we had in our logic that $F\phi \to F F\phi$, then this would means that if $\phi$ is true at some future time, then at some future time it will be true that $\phi$ will be true at some future time, so _between any two instants there must be a third_, and the general truth of this would say something about the 'internal structure' of time as modelled by such a logic. 
=--

This basic temporal language does not yet really constitute a sensible logic that could model important features of 'time'. but we can still look at models so as to see what properties of the models can be identified as corresponding to seemingly feasible formulae in the language.


## Frames and Models for BTL

A _frame_ for BTL will be a set, $T$, with two binary relations $R_F$ and $R_P$.  We have $R_F x y$ reads that 'at $x$, $y$ is in the future'  - but, in the ordinary common sense meaning of words, this should mean $R_P y x$ and conversely.  In other words $R_P$ should be the _converse_ or [[opposite relation]] of $R_F$. 

(In general, if $R$ is a binary relation on a set $X$, then its [[opposite relation]] is defined by 

$$(y,x) \in R^{op} \Leftrightarrow (x,y)\in R.)$$

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition

A frame of the form $(T,R,R^{op})$ is called a _bidirectional frame_.
=--

If we have **any** model $\mathfrak{M} = (T,R,V)$ with a valuation, $V$, then we can interpret BTL in terms of it by specifying  the interpretation of $P$ in terms that of $R$.  explicitly we define 

*  $\mathfrak{M}, t\models F\phi$ if and only if $\exists s (R t s \wedge \mathfrak{M}, s\models \phi);$

*  $\mathfrak{M}, t\models P\phi$ if and only if $\exists s (R s t \wedge \mathfrak{M}, s\models \phi)$,

but, of course, this is still a long way from having a logic that looks as if it captures 'time-like' behaviour. We could have models with 'circular time', and 'branching time'.  Both of these correspond to various situations in computational applications so should be kept in mind, both to be able to identify their occurrence and to build them in or to avoid them in the logics.

## (4)

One condition it would be natural to impose is transitivity of $R_F$, since if $F\phi$ is true at some future time, then clearly, $\phi$ itself must also be true at some future time, i.e., later on still!  This leads one to ask that 

$$(4) \quad\quad    F F\phi \to F\phi$$

should be in our logic,  (and similarly for $P$, but that will hold in the bidirectional models since if $R$ is transitive then so will be $R^{op}$).

## Temporal Logic in Terms of Adjoints

Consider a category $\mathcal{C}$, and an internal poset given by $b, e: Time_1 \rightrightarrows Time_0$. Here we understand elements of $Time_1$ as time intervals, and $b$ and $e$ as marking their beginning and end points. Now each arrow generates an adjoint triple, e.g., $\sum_b \dashv  b^{\ast} \dashv \prod_b$, formed of [[dependent sum]], [[base change]], [[dependent product]], going between the slices $\mathcal{C}/Time_0$ and $\mathcal{C}/Time_1$. 

Then we find two adjunctions $\sum_b e^{\ast} \dashv \prod_e b^{\ast}$ and $\sum_e b^{\ast} \dashv \prod_b e^{\ast}$, e.g.,

$$
Hom(\sum_b e^{\ast} C(t), D(t)) = Hom(e^{\ast} C(t), b^{\ast} D(t)) = Hom(C(t), \prod_e b^{\ast} D(t)).
$$

Now consider for the moment that $C$ and $D$ are propositions. Then $\sum_b e^*C$ means "there is some interval beginning now and such that $C$ is true at its end", i.e. $F C$; while $\prod_e b^*D$ means "for all intervals ending now, $D$ is true at their beginning", i.e. $H D$. Hence our adjunction is $F \dashv H$. Similarly, interchanging $b$ and $e$, we find $P \dashv G$. Note that we don't have to assume the classical principle $G\phi = \neg F\neg \phi$ and $H\phi = \neg P\neg \phi$.

In the setting of dependent type theory, we do not need to restrict to propositions, but can treat the temporal operators on general time-dependent types. So if $People(t)$ is the type of people alive at $t$, $F People(t)$ is the type of people alive at a point in the future of $t$, and $G People(t)$ is a function from future times to people alive at that time, e.g., an element of this is 'The oldest person alive(t)'.


## References

Generally this entry is based on

* P. Blackburn, M. de Rijke and Y. Vedema, _Modal Logic_, Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 53, 2001, 

but see also:

*  A. Galton, [Temporal Logic, (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)] (http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-temporal/)

* [[Patrick Blackburn]], _Tense, Temporal Reference and Tense Logic_, Journal of Semantics, 1994,11,
    pages 83--101, [on-line version](http://www.loria.fr/~blackbur/papers/tense.pdf)

[[!redirects temporal logic]]
[[!redirects temporal logics]]