
* [Wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Dirac)

## Selected writings

On a [[relativistic membrane]] [[model (in theoretical physics)|model]] for the [[electron]]:

* {#Dirac62} [[Paul Dirac]], _An Extensible Model of the Electron_, Proc. Roy. Soc. A268, (1962) 57-67 ([jstor:2414316](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2414316))

* [[Paul Dirac]], _The motion of an Extended Particle in the Gravitational Field_, in Relativistic Theories of Gravitation, Proceedings of a Conference held in Warsaw and Jablonna, July 1962, ed. L. Infeld, P. W. N. Publishers, 1964, Warsaw, 163-171; discussion 171-175 ([spire:1623740](http://inspirehep.net/record/1623740))

* [[Paul Dirac]], _Particles of Finite Size in the Gravitational Field_, Proc. Roy. Soc. A270, (1962) 354-356 ([doi:10.1098/rspa.1962.0228](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1962.0228))


On [[quantum mechanics]] (and some [[quantum field theory]]):

* {#Dirac78} [[Paul Dirac]], _The mathematical foundations of quantum theory_, pages 1-8 in A. R. Marlow (ed.) _Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory_, Ac. Press 1978

* {#Dirac78} [[Paul Dirac]], _[[The Principles of Quantum Mechanics]]_, International series of monographs on physics, Oxford University Press, 1978
  
## Quotes

On [[mathematical physics]]:

> One should keep the need for a sound mathematical basis dominating one’s search for a new theory. Any physical or philosophical ideas that one has must be adjusted to  fit the mathematics. Not the way round. 

> Too many physicists are inclined to start from some preconceived physical ideas and then to try to develop them and ﬁnd a mathematical scheme that incorporates them.  Such a line of attack is unlikely to lead to success. One runs into difficulties and ﬁnds no  reasonable way out of them. One ought then to realize that one’s whole line of approach  is wrong and to seek a new starting point with a sound mathematical basis.

> ([Dirac 78](#Dirac78))


## Related $n$Lab entries

* [[The Principles of Quantum Mechanics]]

* [[quantum electrodynamics]]

* [[Dirac operator]]

* [[Dirac field]]

* [[Dirac spinor]]

category: people

[[!redirects Dirac]]
[[!redirects Paul Dirac]]
[[!redirects Paul A. M. Dirac]]
[[!redirects PAM Dirac]]
[[!redirects P.A.M. Dirac]]
[[!redirects P. A. M. Dirac]]
