
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### 2-Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include 2-category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Limits and colimits
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-limits - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

A **PIE-limit** is a [[strict 2-limit]] which can be constructed from strict [[cartesian product|products]], [[strict inserters]], and [[strict equifiers]].  (More precisely, the class of PIE-limits is the [[saturation of a class of weights|saturation]] of the class containing products, inserters, and equifiers.  Any PIE-limit is in particular a [[flexible limit]], and therefore also a (non-strict) [[2-limit]].

Furthermore, all [[strict pseudo-limits]] are PIE-limits, and therefore any [[strict 2-category]] which admits all PIE-limits also admits all non-strict 2-limits, although it may not have all strict 2-limits.  This is the case, for instance, for the 2-category of strict algebras and pseudo morphisms over a [[strict 2-monad]].

PIE-limits can also be characterized as the coalgebras for a [[pseudo morphism classifier]] [[comonad]], exhibiting them as a 2-categorical version of the notion of [[rigged limit]].

## References

* Blackwell, [[Max Kelly|Kelly]], and [[John Power|Power]], *Two-dimensional monad theory*, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 59 (1989) 1-41. doi:[10.1016/0022-4049(89)90160-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-4049%2889%2990160-6)

* [[John Power|Power]] and Robinson, *A characterization of pie limits*, Math. Proc. Cam. Phil. Soc. (1991) 110, 33. doi:[10.1017/S0305004100070092](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305004100070092)

[[!redirects PIE-limit]]
[[!redirects PIE limit]]
[[!redirects PIE-limits]]
[[!redirects PIE limits]]
[[!redirects pie-limit]]
[[!redirects pie limit]]
[[!redirects pie-limits]]
[[!redirects pie limits]]
