Pilar Carrasco Carrasco is a Spanish mathematician and expert on homotopical and homological algebra, especially with regard to [[crossed modules]] and their higher dimensional analogues. In particular she is an expert on simplicial groups and their structure, and showed a version of the Dold-Kan correspondence between simplicial groups and [[hypercrossed complex]]es.

Her web page in the Departamento de &#193;lgebra, at Granada is [here](http://www.ugr.es/~mcarrasc/).

##Related entries

* [[hypercrossed complex]]

* [[Moore complex]]

##Ph.D. thesis

* Pilar Carrasco, 1987, _Complejos Hipercruzados, Cohomologia y Extensiones_, Ph.D. thesis, Universidad de Granada. 

## Selected writings

* Pilar Carrasco and [[Antonio Cegarra|A. M. Cegarra]], _Group-theoretic Algebraic Models for Homotopy Types_, J. Pure Appl. Alg., 75, (1991), 195 &#8211; 235.

* P. Carrasco and [[T. Porter]], _Coproduct of 2-crossed modules. Applications to a definition of a tensor product for 2-crossed complexes_, Collectanea Mathematica, (DOI) 10.1007/s13348-015-0156-9.

On [[non-abelian cohomology]] with [[coefficients]] in [[braided 2-groups]] and [[symmetric 2-groups]]:

* [[Manuel Bullejos]], [[Pilar Carrasco]], [[Antonio M. Cegarra]], *Cohomology with coefficients in symmetric cat-groups. An extension of Eilenberg–MacLane's classification theorem*, Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society , Volume 114 , Issue 1 , July 1993 , pp. 163 - 189 ([doi:10.1017/S0305004100071498](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305004100071498))



category:people

[[!redirects P. Carrasco]]
[[!redirects Carrasco]]