
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The notion of _Hopf algebra_ is an abstraction of the properties of

* the [[group algebra]] of a [[group]];

* the [[algebra of functions]] on a finite group, and more generally, the algebra of regular functions on an affine algebraic $k$-group;

* the [[universal enveloping algebra]] of a [[Lie algebra]],

where not only the [[associative algebra]] structure is remembered, but also the natural [[coalgebra]] structure, making it a [[bialgebra]], as well as the algebraic structure induced by the [[inverse]]-operation in the group, called the _antipode_.

More intrinsically, a Hopf algebra structure on an [[associative algebra]] is precisely the structure such as to make its [[category of modules]] into a [[rigid monoidal category]] equipped with a [[fiber functor]] -- this is the statement of _[[Tannaka duality]]_ for Hopf algebras.

Hopf algebras and their generalization to [[Hopf algebroids]] arise notably as [[groupoid convolution algebras]]. Another important source of Hopf algebras is [[combinatorics]], see at _[[combinatorial Hopf algebras]]_.

There is a wide variety of variations of the notion of Hopf algebra, relaxing [[properties]] or adding [[structure]]. Examples are _[[weak Hopf algebras]]_, _[[quasi-Hopf algebras]]_, _([[quasi-triangular Hopf algebra|quasi]]-)[[triangular Hopf algebras]]_, _[[quantum groups]]_, _[[hopfish algebras]]_ etc. Most of these notions are systematized via [[Tannaka duality]] by the properties and structures on the coresponding [[categories of modules]], see at _[Tannaka duality](#TannakaDuality)_ below.

## Definition


+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A $k$-[[bialgebra]] $(A,m,\eta,\Delta,\epsilon)$ with multiplication $m$, comultiplication $\Delta$, unit $\eta: k\to A$ and counit $\epsilon:A\to k$ is called a **Hopf algebra**
if there exists a $k$-[[linear function]]

$$S : A \to A$$

called the **antipode** or **coinverse** such that 

$$
  m\circ(\mathrm{id}\otimes S)\circ \Delta = m\circ(S\otimes\mathrm{id})\circ\Delta = \eta\circ\epsilon
$$ 

(as a map $A\to A$). 

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

If an antipode exists then it is unique, just the way that if inverses exist in a [[monoid]] then they are unique. One sometimes prefers to have a __skew-antipode__ $\tilde{S}$ such that $h_{(2)}\tilde{S}(h_{(1)}) = \tilde{S}(h_{(2)}) h_{(1)} = 
(\eta\circ\epsilon) (h)$. If $S$ is an invertible antipode then $\tilde{S} - S^{-1}$ is a skew-antipode. $H$ is a bialgebra with a skew-antipode iff $H^{op}$ (the same vector space, opposite product, the same coproduct) is a Hopf algebra.

The unit of a Hopf algebra is a [[grouplike element]],  hence $S(1)1=1$, therefore $S(1)=1$. By linearity of $S$ this implies that $S\circ\eta\circ\epsilon = \eta\circ\epsilon$.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition
The antipode is an antihomomorphism both of algebras and coalgebras (i.e. a homomorphism $S:A\to A^{cop}_{op}$). 
=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof (algebra part)
In Sweedler notation, for any $g,h\in A$, 

$$S((h g)_{(1)}) (h g)_{(2)} = \epsilon(h g)$$ 

$$S((h g)_{(1)}) h_{(2)}g_{(2)} = \epsilon(h)\epsilon(g)$$

$$S((h g)_{(1)}) h_{(2)}g_{(2)} S g_{(3)} S h_{(3)} = \epsilon(h_{(1)})\epsilon(g_{(1)}) S g_{(2)} S h_{(2)}$$

$$S(h_{(1)}g_{(1)}) \epsilon(h_{(2)})\epsilon(g_{(2)}) = (S g) (S h)$$

$$S(h_{(1)}\epsilon(h_{(2)})g_{(1)}\epsilon(g_{(2)})) = (S g)(S h)$$

Therefore $S(h g) = (S g) (S h)$.

For the coalgebra part, notice first that $\epsilon(h)1\otimes 1 = \tau\circ\Delta(\epsilon(h)1)=\tau\circ\Delta(S h_{(1)}h_{(2)})$. Expand this as 

$$ (S h_{(1)}\otimes S h_{(2)})(h_{(4)}\otimes h_{(3)}) = ((S h_{(1)})_{(2)}\otimes (S h_{(1)})_{(1)})(h_{(4)}\otimes h_{(3)})$$

$$ (S h_{(1)}\otimes S h_{(2)})(h_{(4)}\otimes h_{(3)}) (S h_{(5)}\otimes S h_{(6)}) = ((S h_{(1)})_{(2)}\otimes (S h_{(1)})_{(1)})(h_{(3)}\otimes h_{(2)})(S h_{(4)}\otimes S h_{(5)})$$

$$ ((S h_{(1)}\otimes S h_{(2)})\epsilon(h_{(3)}) = ((S h_{(1)})_{(2)}\otimes (S h_{(1)})_{(1)})(1\otimes\epsilon(h_{(2)}))$$

$$ ((S h_{(1)}\otimes S h_{(2)})\epsilon(h_{(3)}) = (\tau\circ\Delta)(S h_{(1)})(1\otimes\epsilon(h_{(2)})1) = (\tau\circ\Delta)(S h_{(1)}\epsilon(h_{(2)}))$$

$$ (S h_{(1)}\otimes S h_{(2)})=(\tau\circ\Delta)(S h) = (S h)_{(2)}\otimes (S h)_{(1)}.$$
=--


The axiom that must be satisfied by the antipode looks like a $k$-linear version of the identity satisfied by the inverse map in a group bimonoid: taking a group element $g$, duplicating by the diagonal map $\Delta$ to obtain $(g,g)$, taking the inverse of either component of this ordered pair, and then multiplying the two components, we obtain the identity element of our group.

Just as an [[algebra]] is a [[monoid]] in [[Vect]] and a [[bialgebra]] is a [[bimonoid]] in $Vect$, a Hopf algebra is a [[Hopf monoid]] in $Vect$.


+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark
**Caution: convention in topology**

In [[algebraic topology]], it is common to define Hopf algebras without mentioning the antipode, since in many topological cases of interest it exists automatically.  For example, this is the case if it is [[graded object|graded]] and "connected" in the sense that its degree-0 part is just the [[ground field]] (a property possessed by the homology or cohomology of any connected space).  In algebraic topology also the strict coassociativity is not always taken for granted.

=--




## Properties

### Relation to Hopf groups

Note that the definition of Hopf algebra (or, really, of [[Hopf monoid]]) is [[duality|self-dual]]: a Hopf monoid in a symmetric monoidal category $V$ is the same as a Hopf monoid in $V^{op}$ (i.e. a "Hopf comonoid").  Thus we can view a Hopf algebra as "like a group" in two different ways, depending on whether the group multiplication corresponds to the multiplication or the comultiplication of the Hopf algebra.  The formal connections between Hopf monoids and group objects are:

1. A Hopf monoid in a [[cartesian monoidal category]] $V$ is the same as a group object in $V$.  Such Hopf monoids are always _cocommutative_ (that is, their underlying comonoid is cocommutative).  This is because every object of a cartesian monoidal category is a cocommutative comonoid object in a unique way, and every morphism is a comonoid homomorphism.

1. A _commutative_ Hopf monoid in a [[symmetric monoidal category]] $V$ is the same as a group object in $CMon(V)^{op}$, where $CMon(V)$ is the category of commutative monoids in $V$.  This works because the tensor product of commutative algebras is the categorical [[coproduct]], and hence the [[product]] in its [[opposite category]]. In particular, a commutative Hopf algebra is the same as a group object in the category $Alg^{op}$ of affine schemes.

Corresponding to these two, an ordinary group $G$ gives us two different Hopf algebras (here $k$ is the [[ground ring]]):

1. The [[group algebra]] $k[G]$ (the free vector space on the set $G$), with multiplication given by the group operation of $G$ and comultiplication given by the diagonal $g\mapsto g\otimes g$.  This Hopf algebra is always cocommutative, and is commutative iff $G$ is abelian.  It can be viewed as the result of applying the [[strong monoidal functor]] $k[-]:Set \to k Mod$ to the Hopf monoid $G$ in $Set$.

1. The function algebra $k(G)$ (the set of functions $G\to k$), with comultiplication given by precomposition with the group operation
$$k(G) \to k(G\times G) \cong k(G)\otimes k(G),$$
and multiplication given by pointwise multiplication in $k$.  In this case we need some finiteness or algebraicity of $G$ in order to guarantee $k(G\times G) \cong k(G)\otimes k(G)$.  This Hopf algebra is always commutative, and is cocommutative iff $G$ is abelian.

Note that if $G$ is finite, then $k[G]\cong k(G)$ as $k$-modules, but the Hopf algebra structure is quite different.

+-- {: .query}
Mike, can you do something with these notes that I took at some point as a grad student?  I don\'t know this stuff very well, which is why I don\'t incorporate them into the text, but at least I cleaned up the formatting a bit so that you can if you like it.  ---Toby

>One can make a group into a Hopf algebra in at least $2$ very different ways.  Both ways have a discrete version and a smooth version.

>Given a (finite, discrete) group $G$ and a ground ring (field?) $K$, then the group ring $K[G]$ is a cocommutative Hopf algebra, with $M(g_0,g_1) = g_0 g_1$, $I = 1$, $D(g) = g \otimes g$, $E(g) = 1$, and the nifty Hopf antipodal operator $S(g) = g^{-1}$.  Notice that the coalgebra operations $D,E$ depend only on $Set|G|$.

>Given a (finite, discrete) group $G$ and a ground ring (field?) $K$, then the function ring $Fun(G,K)$ is a commutative Hopf algebra, with $M(f_0,f_1)(g) = f_0(g)f_1(g)$, $I(g) = 1$, $D(f)(g,h) = f(g h)$, $E(f) = f(1)$, and the nifty Hopf antipodal operator $S(f)(g) = f(g^{-1})$.  Notice that the algebra operations $M,I$ depend only on $Set|G|$.

>Given a (simply connected) Lie group $G$ and the complex (real?) field $K$, then the universal enveloping algebra $U(G)$ is a cocommutative Hopf algebra, with $M(\mathbf{g}_0,\mathbf{g}_1) = \mathbf{g}_0 \mathbf{g}_1$, $I = 1$, $D(\mathbf{g}) = \mathbf{g} \otimes 1 + 1 \otimes \mathbf{g}$, $E(\mathbf{g}) = 0$, and the nifty Hopf antipodal operator $S(\mathbf{g}) = -\mathbf{g}$.  Notice that the coalgebra operation $D,E$ depend only on $K Vect|\mathfrak{g}|$.

>Given a (compact) Lie group $G$ and the complex (real?) field $K$, then the algebraic function ring $Anal(G)$ is a cocommutative Hopf algebra, with $M(f_0,f_1)(g) = f_0(g) f_1(g)$, $I(g) = 1$, $D(f)(g,h) = f(g h)$, $E(f) = f(1)$, and the nifty Hopf antipodal operator $S(f)(g) = f(g^{-1})$.  Notice that the algebra operations $M,I$ depend only on $Anal Man|G|$.
=--


###  The theorem of Hopf modules 

Hopf algebras can be characterized among bialgebras by the fundamental theorem on [[Hopf module|Hopf modules]]: the category of Hopf modules over a bialgebra is canonically equivalent to the category of vector spaces over the ground ring iff the bialgebra is a Hopf algebra.  This categorical fact enables a definition of Hopf monoids in some setups that do not allow a sensible definition of antipode.

### Tannaka duality
 {#TannakaDuality}

The [[category of modules]] (finite dimensional) over the underlying [[associative algebra]] of a Hopf algebra canonically inherits the structure of an [[rigid monoidal category|rigid]] [[monoidal category]] such that the forgetful [[fiber functor]] to [[vector spaces]] over the ground field is a [[strict monoidal functor]]. 

The statement of [[Tannaka duality]] for Hopf algebras is that this property characterizes Hopf algebras. (See for instance ([Bakke](#Bakke)))

For generalization of this characterization to [[quasi-Hopf algebras]] and [[hopfish algebras]] see ([Vercruysse](#Vercruysse)).

[[!include structure on algebras and their module categories - table]]

### As 3-vector spaces

A Hopf algebra structure on an [[associative algebra]] $A$ canonically defines on $A$ the structure of an algebra object [[internalization|internal]] to the [[2-category]] of algebras, [[bimodule]]s and bimodule homomorphisms.

By the discussion at [[n-vector space]] this allows to identify Hopf algebras with certain _3-vector spaces_ . 

(For instance ([FHLT, p. 27](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Topological+Quantum+Field+Theories+from+Compact+Lie+Groups))).

More general 3-vector spaces are given by _[[hopfish algebras]]_ and generally by [[sesquiunital sesquialgebras]].


## Examples

* [[group algebra]]

* [[Steenrod algebra]]


## Related concepts

* [[quasi-Hopf algebra]]

* [[triangular Hopf algebra]]

* [[quasitriangular Hopf algebra]]/[[quantum group]]

* [[hopfish algebra]]

* [[Hopf algebroid]]

* [[Hopf C-star algebra]]

* [[Hopf monoid]]

* [[Hopf monoidal category]]

* [[Hopf monad]]

* [[change of rings theorem]]

## References

For a diagrammatic definition of a Hopf algebra, see the [Wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hopf_algebra#Formal_definition).

* Eiichi Abe, _Hopf algebras_, Cambridge UP 1980.

* [[Pierre Cartier]], _A primer on Hopf algebras_, IHES 2006, 81p ([pdf](http://www.math.osu.edu/~kerler.2/VIGRE/InvResPres-Sp07/Cartier-IHES.pdf))

* V. G. [[Drinfel'd]], _Quantum groups_, Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians 1986, Vol. 1, 2 798--820, AMS 1987, [djvu:1.3 M](http://www.mathunion.org/ICM/ICM1986.1/Main/icm1986.1.0798.0820.ocr.djvu), [pdf:2.5 M](http://www.mathunion.org/ICM/ICM1986.1/Main/icm1986.1.0798.0820.ocr.pdf)

* G. Hochschild, _Introduction to algebraic group schemes_, 1971

* S. Majid, _Foundations of quantum group theory_, Cambridge University Press 1995, 2000.

* [[John Milnor]], [[John Moore]], _The structure of Hopf algebras_, Annals of Math. __81__ (1965), 211-264.

* Susan Montgomery, _Hopf algebras and their action on rings_, AMS 1994, 240p.

* B. Parshall, J.Wang, _Quantum linear groups_, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 89(1991), No. 439, vi+157 pp.

* M. Sweedler, _Hopf algebras_, Benjamin 1969.

* William C. Waterhouse, _Introduction to affine group schemes_, Graduate Texts in Mathematics __66__, Springer 1979. xi+164 pp.

[[Tannaka duality]] for Hopf algebras and their generalization is alluded to in 

* Joost Vercruysse, _Hopf algebras---Variant notions and reconstruction theorems_ ([arXiv:1202.3613](http://arxiv.org/abs/1202.3613))
 {#Vercruysse}

and discussed in detail in 

* Tørris Koløen Bakke, _Hopf algebras and monoidal categories_ (2007) ([pdf](http://munin.uit.no/bitstream/handle/10037/1084/finalthesis.pdf;jsessionid=C0D15EADBDC35E93D95D2DD090411004?sequence=1))
 {#Bakke}

Discussion with an eye towards [[stable homotopy theory]] and the [[Steenrod algebra]] is in 

* [[Doug Ravenel]], appendix 1 of _[[Complex cobordism and stable homotopy groups of spheres]]_ ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/people/faculty/doug/mybooks/ravenelA1.pdf))

[[!redirects antipode]]
[[!redirects skew-antipode]]
[[!redirects Hopf algebras]]