pages/5280.md, before:


# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Statement

The _Cantor--Schroeder--Bernstein_ theorem says that the usual [[order relation]] on [[cardinalities]] of [[set]]s is [[antisymmetric relation|antisymmetric]]. In other words, define an order on sets by $X \leq Y$ if there exists a [[monomorphism]] $f\colon X \to Y$. Then, if both $X \leq Y$ and $Y \leq X$, there exists an [[isomorphism]] of sets $X \cong Y$.

The result is really only interesting in the absence of the [[axiom of choice]] ($AC$).  With $AC$, it is a trivial corollary of the [[well-ordering theorem]].  However, the theorem actually requires only [[excluded middle]], although it does not hold in [[constructive mathematics]].


## Proof 

We prove that the Cantor--Schroeder--Bernstein theorem holds in a [[Boolean topos]]. The theorem is not however [[intuitionistic logic|intuitionistically]] valid, in that it fails in some [[topos]]es, such as the topos $Set^{\bullet \to \bullet}$ (the [[arrow category]] of $Set$); see Example \ref{counterexample} below. 

Throughout we use ordinary [[set theory|set-theoretic]] reasoning which can be translated into the formal theory of toposes. (This can be formalized via the [[Mitchell–Benabou language]], for instance.) 

+-- {: .num_lemma}
###### Lemma (Knaster--Tarski fixed-point theorem) 
Let $f\colon P X \to P X$ be an order-preserving map. Then there exists $S$ in $P X$ for which $f(S) = S$. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof 
Let $S$ be the (internal) [[intersection]] of $U = \{T \in P X : f(T) \leq T\}$. Since $S \leq T$ for every $T$ in $U$, we have $f(S) \leq f(T) \leq T$ for every $T$ in $U$. Hence $f(S) \leq S$ by definition of $S$. Applying $f$ again, we get $f f(S) \leq f(S)$. Hence $f(S)$ belongs to $U$. But then $S \leq f(S)$ by definition of $S$.
=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Remark

The preceding proof is valid in _any_ topos (and so holds for $Set$ even intuitionistically). It can be seen as a special case of a result of Lambek on the [[initial algebra|initial]] [[algebra of an endofunctor]]. 
=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof of Cantor--Schroeder--Bernstein

Suppose given two monos $f\colon X \to Y$, $g\colon Y \to X$. Let $\exists_f\colon P X \to P Y$ denote [[existential quantification]] along $f$, and let $\neg_X\colon P X \to P X$ denote [[negation]]. Then the composite 

$$\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f\colon P X \to P X$$ 

is order-preserving, and so has a fixed point $S$ by the lemma. Now define 
$h\colon X \to Y$ by the rule 

$$\array{
h(x) & = & f(x) & if x \in S \\
h(x) & = & g^{-1}(x) & if x \notin S
}$$ 

(the multi-line definition is where we use the Boolean condition). The second line makes sense because $\neg S$ is in the image of $g$. The inverse of $h$ is 

$$\array{
j(y) & = & f^{-1}(y) & if y \in \exists_f(S) \\
j(y) & = & g(y) & if y \notin \exists_f(S)
}$$

That $j$ is inverse to h uses the fact that $\neg S = \exists_g \neg \exists_f(S)$. The rest is obvious. 
=--

This classic proof is substantially the proof given in Johnstone's [[Elephant]], D4.1.11. The Boolean condition is not strictly speaking necessary, i.e., the [[principle of excluded middle]] ($EM$) does not logically follow from the Cantor--Schroeder--Bernstein statement since, for example, the latter holds vacuously (every mono is an iso) in the non-Boolean topos 

$$FinSet^C$$ 

where $C$ is any nontrivial [[finite category]]. But $EM$ is certainly the most natural supposition to make.

### Alternative proof {#alt}

In some schools of thought, the Knaster-Tarski lemma could be criticized on grounds of being [[predicative mathematics|impredicative]]. However, the application made of it in the proof of the CSB theorem is only to ensure that the operator $\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f: P X \to P X$ has a fixed point. If that is all we need, then we may alternatively prove this fact, both predicatively and constructively, as a special case of Ad&aacute;mek's theorem (see [[terminal coalgebra of an endofunctor]]).  

+-- {: .num_lemma} 
###### Lemma 
If $f: X \to Y$ is monic, then the operator $\exists_f: P X \to P Y$ preserves limits of inverse chains $\omega^{op} \to P X$ (i.e. intersections of decreasing sequences). 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
More generally, $\exists_f$ preserves [[connected limits]], because it lifts through the inclusion $i: P Y \downarrow \exists_f(1) \hookrightarrow P Y$ to an isomorphism $P X \stackrel{\sim}{\to} P Y \downarrow \exists_f(1)$ (here $1$ denotes the top element of $P X$, aka $X$), and $i$ preserves connected limits. 

In more detail: by [[Frobenius reciprocity]], we have $\exists_f S \wedge T = \exists_f(S \wedge f^\ast T)$ for elements $S$ of $P X$ and $T$ of $P Y$. Putting $S = 1$, we get $\exists_f 1 \wedge T = \exists_f f^\ast T$, and so the composite 

$$P Y \downarrow \exists_f 1 \stackrel{f^\ast}{\to} P X \stackrel{\exists_f}{\to} P Y \downarrow \exists_f 1$$ 

is the identity. But since $f$ is monic, $f^\ast \exists_f: P X \to P X$ is also the identity, which completes the proof. 
=-- 

Note that also $\forall_g = \neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y$ preserves such limits (it preserves all limits, as $g^\ast \dashv \forall_g$). So by the preceding lemma, the composite $\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f$ preserves limits of inverse chains. 

Putting now $A_0 = 1$ (the top element of $P X$), $A_1 = \neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f(1)$, and generally $A_n = (\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f)^n(1)$, we have $A_{n+1} \subseteq A_n$ (apply the monotone operator $(\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f)^n$ to the inclusion $A_1 \subseteq A_0$), and so $\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f$ preserves the intersection of the inverse chain $\ldots \subseteq A_n \subseteq \ldots \subseteq A_1 \subseteq A_0$,

$$S = \bigcap_{n \geq 0} (\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f)^n(1),$$ 

which implies that $S$ is a fixed point of $\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f$, as desired. In fact this $S$ is the maximal fixed point, just as in the conclusion of the Knaster-Tarski lemma (cf. [[terminal coalgebra of an endofunctor]]). 


## Failure in toposes 

+-- {: .num_example #Top}
###### Example

Counterexample \ref{counterexample2} below shows that the CSB theorem fails in Brouwer\'s [[intuitionistic mathematics]] even for $Set$ (since every function between the sets $[0, 1]$ and $\mathbb{R}$ must be continuous by Brouwer\'s continuity principle!). See also the discussion in [Mac Lane-Moerdijk](#MM), VI.9, on toposes that realize Brouwer's theorem. 
=--

+-- {: .num_example #counterexample} 
###### Example 

As mentioned above, the Cantor-Schroeder-Bernstein theorem fails in the arrow category $Set^\to$, whose objects are functions $X_0 \to X_1$ between sets and whose morphisms are commutative squares. For example, let $X$ be the object $f: \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$ that takes $n \in \mathbb{N}$ to $\mathrm{int}(n/2)$, where $\mathrm{int}(x)$ is the greatest integer less than or equal to $x$; let $Y$ be the object $g: \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$ that takes $n$ to $\mathrm{Int}((n+1)/2)$, where $\mathrm{Int}(x)$ is the least integer greater than or equal to $x$. Pretty clearly $X$ and $Y$ are non-isomorphic, because $g^{-1}(0)$ has cardinality $1$ whereas all fibers of $f$ have cardinality $2$. But, just by drawing pictures of these objects, it is easy to construct monomophisms $i: X \to Y$ and $j: Y \to X$ (e.g., define $i_0(n) = n+1$ and $i_1(n) = n+1$ for all $n$, and define $j_0(n) = n+1$ for $n \gt 0$, $j_0(0) = 0$, and $j_1(n) = n$ for all $n$). 
=-- 

Nor can one have internal existence of an isomorphism between $X$ and $Y$ in this last example, since internal existence implies external existence as soon as the terminal object is (externally) projective. 

## In other categories

The CSB property holds in many other [[categories]] of interest. For example: 

+-- {: .num_example #model} 
###### Example 
The CSB property holds in the category of [[vector space]]s and in the category of [[algebraically closed field]]s. See also this [MO post](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/1058/when-does-cantor-bernstein-hold), where model-theoretic criteria come into play, sometimes under strengthenings of the notion of monomorphism (e.g., [[elementary embedding]], [[split monomorphism]]). 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_example #counterexample2} 
###### Counterexample 
On the other hand, the CSB property fails in [[Top]], since we have [[embeddings]] $\mathbb{R} \cong (0,1) \to [0,1] \to \mathbb{R}$, yet $[0,1] \ncong \mathbb{R}$. 
=-- 

More examples and discussion can be found at this Secret Blogging Seminar [post](http://sbseminar.wordpress.com/2007/10/30/theme-and-variations-schroeder-bernstein/). 

In a [celebrated work](#Gowers), [[Timothy Gowers]] gave a negative solution in the case of [[Banach spaces]].


## Name

The CSB theorem was first stated by [[Georg Cantor]], but his proof relied on the [[well-ordering theorem]].  The modern (choice-free) theorem was proved (independently) by [[Felix Bernstein]] and [[Ernst Schröder]].  It has been variously named after two or three of these in almost every possible combination, although Cantor (when mentioned at all) seems always to be mentioned first. 

[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cantor%E2%80%93Bernstein%E2%80%93Schroeder_theorem#History) reports that [[Richard Dedekind]] had an (unpublished) proof in 1887, well before any announced proofs by Cantor, Schroeder, or Bernstein in 1895, 1896, 1897 respectively. 


## References 

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _[[Sketches of an Elephant]]: A Topos Theory Conpendium_, Vol. I, Clarendon Press, Oxford (2002)

* [[Timothy Gowers]], _A Solution to the Schroeder-Bernstein Problem for Banach Spaces_, Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society, Volume 28, Issue 3 (1996), 297-304 [(abstract)](http://blms.oxfordjournals.org/content/28/3/297.abstract)
{#Gowers} 

* [[Saunders Mac Lane]] and [[Ieke Moerdijk]], _Sheaves in Geometry and Logic_, Springer-Verlag 1992. 
{#MM}


[[!redirects Cantor-Schroeder-Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor–Schroeder–Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor--Schroeder--Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor-Schroeder-Bernstein Theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor–Schroeder–Bernstein Theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor--Schroeder--Bernstein Theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor-Schröder-Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor–Schröder–Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor--Schröder--Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor-Schröder-Bernstein Theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor–Schröder–Bernstein Theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor--Schröder--Bernstein Theorem]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 105714 Revision date: 2016-02-16 10:39:57 Page name: Cantor-Schroeder-Bernstein theorem Author: Dmitri Pavlov IP address: 195.37.209.180

pages/5280.md, after:


# Contents
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Statement

The _Cantor--Schröder--Bernstein_ theorem says that the usual [[order relation]] on [[cardinalities]] of [[set]]s is [[antisymmetric relation|antisymmetric]]. In other words, define an order on sets by $X \leq Y$ if there exists a [[monomorphism]] $f\colon X \to Y$. Then, if both $X \leq Y$ and $Y \leq X$, there exists an [[isomorphism]] of sets $X \cong Y$.

The result is really only interesting in the absence of the [[axiom of choice]] ($AC$).  With $AC$, it is a trivial corollary of the [[well-ordering theorem]].  However, the theorem actually requires only [[excluded middle]], although it does not hold in [[constructive mathematics]].


## Proof 

We prove that the Cantor--Schröder--Bernstein theorem holds in a [[Boolean topos]]. The theorem is not however [[intuitionistic logic|intuitionistically]] valid, in that it fails in some [[topos]]es, such as the topos $Set^{\bullet \to \bullet}$ (the [[arrow category]] of $Set$); see Example \ref{counterexample} below. 

Throughout we use ordinary [[set theory|set-theoretic]] reasoning which can be translated into the formal theory of toposes. (This can be formalized via the [[Mitchell–Benabou language]], for instance.) 

+-- {: .num_lemma}
###### Lemma (Knaster--Tarski fixed-point theorem) 
Let $f\colon P X \to P X$ be an order-preserving map. Then there exists $S$ in $P X$ for which $f(S) = S$. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof 
Let $S$ be the (internal) [[intersection]] of $U = \{T \in P X : f(T) \leq T\}$. Since $S \leq T$ for every $T$ in $U$, we have $f(S) \leq f(T) \leq T$ for every $T$ in $U$. Hence $f(S) \leq S$ by definition of $S$. Applying $f$ again, we get $f f(S) \leq f(S)$. Hence $f(S)$ belongs to $U$. But then $S \leq f(S)$ by definition of $S$.
=--

+-- {: .un_remark}
###### Remark

The preceding proof is valid in _any_ topos (and so holds for $Set$ even intuitionistically). It can be seen as a special case of a result of Lambek on the [[initial algebra|initial]] [[algebra of an endofunctor]]. 
=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof of Cantor--Schröder--Bernstein

Suppose given two monos $f\colon X \to Y$, $g\colon Y \to X$. Let $\exists_f\colon P X \to P Y$ denote [[existential quantification]] along $f$, and let $\neg_X\colon P X \to P X$ denote [[negation]]. Then the composite 

$$\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f\colon P X \to P X$$ 

is order-preserving, and so has a fixed point $S$ by the lemma. Now define 
$h\colon X \to Y$ by the rule 

$$\array{
h(x) & = & f(x) & if x \in S \\
h(x) & = & g^{-1}(x) & if x \notin S
}$$ 

(the multi-line definition is where we use the Boolean condition). The second line makes sense because $\neg S$ is in the image of $g$. The inverse of $h$ is 

$$\array{
j(y) & = & f^{-1}(y) & if y \in \exists_f(S) \\
j(y) & = & g(y) & if y \notin \exists_f(S)
}$$

That $j$ is inverse to h uses the fact that $\neg S = \exists_g \neg \exists_f(S)$. The rest is obvious. 
=--

This classic proof is substantially the proof given in Johnstone's [[Elephant]], D4.1.11. The Boolean condition is not strictly speaking necessary, i.e., the [[principle of excluded middle]] ($EM$) does not logically follow from the Cantor--Schröder--Bernstein statement since, for example, the latter holds vacuously (every mono is an iso) in the non-Boolean topos 

$$FinSet^C$$ 

where $C$ is any nontrivial [[finite category]]. But $EM$ is certainly the most natural supposition to make.

### Alternative proof {#alt}

In some schools of thought, the Knaster-Tarski lemma could be criticized on grounds of being [[predicative mathematics|impredicative]]. However, the application made of it in the proof of the CSB theorem is only to ensure that the operator $\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f: P X \to P X$ has a fixed point. If that is all we need, then we may alternatively prove this fact, both predicatively and constructively, as a special case of Ad&aacute;mek's theorem (see [[terminal coalgebra of an endofunctor]]).  

+-- {: .num_lemma} 
###### Lemma 
If $f: X \to Y$ is monic, then the operator $\exists_f: P X \to P Y$ preserves limits of inverse chains $\omega^{op} \to P X$ (i.e. intersections of decreasing sequences). 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
More generally, $\exists_f$ preserves [[connected limits]], because it lifts through the inclusion $i: P Y \downarrow \exists_f(1) \hookrightarrow P Y$ to an isomorphism $P X \stackrel{\sim}{\to} P Y \downarrow \exists_f(1)$ (here $1$ denotes the top element of $P X$, aka $X$), and $i$ preserves connected limits. 

In more detail: by [[Frobenius reciprocity]], we have $\exists_f S \wedge T = \exists_f(S \wedge f^\ast T)$ for elements $S$ of $P X$ and $T$ of $P Y$. Putting $S = 1$, we get $\exists_f 1 \wedge T = \exists_f f^\ast T$, and so the composite 

$$P Y \downarrow \exists_f 1 \stackrel{f^\ast}{\to} P X \stackrel{\exists_f}{\to} P Y \downarrow \exists_f 1$$ 

is the identity. But since $f$ is monic, $f^\ast \exists_f: P X \to P X$ is also the identity, which completes the proof. 
=-- 

Note that also $\forall_g = \neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y$ preserves such limits (it preserves all limits, as $g^\ast \dashv \forall_g$). So by the preceding lemma, the composite $\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f$ preserves limits of inverse chains. 

Putting now $A_0 = 1$ (the top element of $P X$), $A_1 = \neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f(1)$, and generally $A_n = (\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f)^n(1)$, we have $A_{n+1} \subseteq A_n$ (apply the monotone operator $(\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f)^n$ to the inclusion $A_1 \subseteq A_0$), and so $\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f$ preserves the intersection of the inverse chain $\ldots \subseteq A_n \subseteq \ldots \subseteq A_1 \subseteq A_0$,

$$S = \bigcap_{n \geq 0} (\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f)^n(1),$$ 

which implies that $S$ is a fixed point of $\neg_X \exists_g \neg_Y \exists_f$, as desired. In fact this $S$ is the maximal fixed point, just as in the conclusion of the Knaster-Tarski lemma (cf. [[terminal coalgebra of an endofunctor]]). 


## Failure in toposes 

+-- {: .num_example #Top}
###### Example

Counterexample \ref{counterexample2} below shows that the CSB theorem fails in Brouwer\'s [[intuitionistic mathematics]] even for $Set$ (since every function between the sets $[0, 1]$ and $\mathbb{R}$ must be continuous by Brouwer\'s continuity principle!). See also the discussion in [Mac Lane-Moerdijk](#MM), VI.9, on toposes that realize Brouwer's theorem. 
=--

+-- {: .num_example #counterexample} 
###### Example 

As mentioned above, the Cantor-Schröder-Bernstein theorem fails in the arrow category $Set^\to$, whose objects are functions $X_0 \to X_1$ between sets and whose morphisms are commutative squares. For example, let $X$ be the object $f: \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$ that takes $n \in \mathbb{N}$ to $\mathrm{int}(n/2)$, where $\mathrm{int}(x)$ is the greatest integer less than or equal to $x$; let $Y$ be the object $g: \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$ that takes $n$ to $\mathrm{Int}((n+1)/2)$, where $\mathrm{Int}(x)$ is the least integer greater than or equal to $x$. Pretty clearly $X$ and $Y$ are non-isomorphic, because $g^{-1}(0)$ has cardinality $1$ whereas all fibers of $f$ have cardinality $2$. But, just by drawing pictures of these objects, it is easy to construct monomophisms $i: X \to Y$ and $j: Y \to X$ (e.g., define $i_0(n) = n+1$ and $i_1(n) = n+1$ for all $n$, and define $j_0(n) = n+1$ for $n \gt 0$, $j_0(0) = 0$, and $j_1(n) = n$ for all $n$). 
=-- 

Nor can one have internal existence of an isomorphism between $X$ and $Y$ in this last example, since internal existence implies external existence as soon as the terminal object is (externally) projective. 

## In other categories

The CSB property holds in many other [[categories]] of interest. For example: 

+-- {: .num_example #model} 
###### Example 
The CSB property holds in the category of [[vector space]]s and in the category of [[algebraically closed field]]s. See also this [MO post](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/1058/when-does-cantor-bernstein-hold), where model-theoretic criteria come into play, sometimes under strengthenings of the notion of monomorphism (e.g., [[elementary embedding]], [[split monomorphism]]). 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_example #counterexample2} 
###### Counterexample 
On the other hand, the CSB property fails in [[Top]], since we have [[embeddings]] $\mathbb{R} \cong (0,1) \to [0,1] \to \mathbb{R}$, yet $[0,1] \ncong \mathbb{R}$. 
=-- 

More examples and discussion can be found at this Secret Blogging Seminar [post](http://sbseminar.wordpress.com/2007/10/30/theme-and-variations-schroeder-bernstein/). 

In a [celebrated work](#Gowers), [[Timothy Gowers]] gave a negative solution in the case of [[Banach spaces]].


## Name

The CSB theorem was first stated by [[Georg Cantor]], but his proof relied on the [[well-ordering theorem]].  The modern (choice-free) theorem was proved (independently) by [[Felix Bernstein]] and [[Ernst Schröder]].  It has been variously named after two or three of these in almost every possible combination, although Cantor (when mentioned at all) seems always to be mentioned first. 

[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cantor%E2%80%93Bernstein%E2%80%93Schroeder_theorem#History) reports that [[Richard Dedekind]] had an (unpublished) proof in 1887, well before any announced proofs by Cantor, Schröder, or Bernstein in 1895, 1896, 1897 respectively. 


## References 

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _[[Sketches of an Elephant]]: A Topos Theory Conpendium_, Vol. I, Clarendon Press, Oxford (2002)

* [[Timothy Gowers]], _A Solution to the Schroeder-Bernstein Problem for Banach Spaces_, Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society, Volume 28, Issue 3 (1996), 297-304 [(abstract)](http://blms.oxfordjournals.org/content/28/3/297.abstract)
{#Gowers} 

* [[Saunders Mac Lane]] and [[Ieke Moerdijk]], _Sheaves in Geometry and Logic_, Springer-Verlag 1992. 
{#MM}


[[!redirects Cantor-Schroeder-Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor–Schroeder–Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor--Schroeder--Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor-Schroeder-Bernstein Theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor–Schroeder–Bernstein Theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor--Schroeder--Bernstein Theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor-Schröder-Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor–Schröder–Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor--Schröder--Bernstein theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor-Schröder-Bernstein Theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor–Schröder–Bernstein Theorem]]
[[!redirects Cantor--Schröder--Bernstein Theorem]]
