
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In _anabelian geometry_ one studies how much information about a [[space]] $X$ (specifically: an [[algebraic variety]]) is contained already in its first [[étale homotopy group]] $\pi_1^{et}(x,X)$ (specifically: the [[algebraic fundamental group]]). 

The term "anabalian" is alluding to "the _less_ [[abelian group|abelian]] $\pi_1(x,X)$ is, the more information it carries about $X$." Precisely: an [[anabelian group]] is a non-[[trivial group]] for which every [[finite index subgroup]] has trivial [[center]].

Accordingly, an algebraic variety whose [[isomorphism class]] is entirely determined by $\pi_1^{et}(x,X)$ is called an **anabelian variety**.

An early conjecture motivating the theory (in [Grothendieck](#Grothendieck)) was that that all [[hyperbolic curve]]s over [[number fields]] are anabelian varieties. This was eventually proven by various authors in various cases.  In ([Uchida](#Uchida)) and ([Neukirch](#Neukirch)) it was shown that an isomorphism between [[Galois groups]] of [[number fields]] implies the existence of an isomorphism between those number fields. For algebraic curves over [[finite fields]], over [[number fields]] and over [[p-adic field]] the statement was eventually completed by ([Mochizuki 96](#Mochizuki96)).

Grothendieck also conjectured the existence of higher-dimensional anabelian varieties, but these are still very mysterious.


##Related entries

* [[child's drawing]]/ Dessins d'enfant.  

* [[profinite completion]]

* [[algebraic fundamental group]] also called the 'geometric fundamental 
group' by Grothendieck.

* [[inter-universal Teichmüller theory]]

* [[Grothendieck-Teichmüller group]]. 


##References

The notion of anabelian geometry is from a “letter to Faltings”, written by Grothendieck in response to Faltings’ work on the Mordell Conjecture.

There is some mention (?) in 

* [[Alexander Grothendieck]], _[[Esquisse d'un programme]]_
 {#Grothendieck}

A quick survey is on page 60 (2) of 

* [[Leila Schneps]], _Grothendieck's "Long march through Galois theory"_ ([pdf](http://www.math.jussieu.fr/~leila/SchnepsLM.pdf))

A comprehensive introduction is in 

* Fedor Bogomolov, Yuri Tschinkel, _Introduction to birational anabelian geometry_ ([pdf](http://www.math.nyu.edu/~tschinke/papers/yuri/10msri/msri7.pdf))

Examples are discussed in

* Yasutaka Ihara, Hiroaki Nakamura, _Some illustrative examples for anabelian geometry in high dimensions_, in [[Leila Schneps]], P. Lochak (eds) _Geometric Galois Actions I_, London Math. Soc. Lect. Note Series 242 ([pdf](http://www.math.okayama-u.ac.jp/~h-naka/zoo/lion/INanabel.pdf))

The classification of anabelian varieties for number fields was shown in 

* J. Neukirch, _Kennzeichnung der $p$-adischen und der endlichen algebraischen Zahlkörper_, Invent. Math. 6 (1969), p. 296–314.
 {#Neukirch}

* J. Neukirch, _Über die absoluten Galoisgruppen algebraischer Zahlkörper_, Journées Arithmétiques de Caen (Univ. Caen, Caen, 1976), pp. 67–79. Asterisque, No. 41-42, Soc. Math. France, Paris (1977)

* K. Uchida. _Isomorphisms of Galois groups_, J. Math. Soc. Japan 28 (1976), no. 4, 617–620. 
  {#Uchida}

* K. Uchida, _Isomorphisms of Galois groups of algebraic function fields_, Ann. Math. (2) 106 (1977), no. 3, p. 589–598.


and for algebraic curves in

* [[Shinichi Mochizuki]], _The profinite Grothendieck conjecture for hyperbolic curves over number fields_, J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo 3 (1996), 571–627.
 {#Mochizuki96}

* [[Shinichi Mochizuki]], _The absolute anabelian geometry of canonical curves_ (2002) ([pdf](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/documenta/vol-kato/mochizuki.dm.pdf))

See also 

* Frans Oort, [Lecture notes](http://www.staff.science.uu.nl/~oort0109/IC.AnabelianWorkshop.ps). Informal notes (not for publication) made available for the Lorentz Center workshop 'Anabelian number theory and geometry', December 3-5, 2001


[[!redirects anabelian variety]]
[[!redirects anabelian varieties]]
