Weak $\omega$-categories are examples of [[higher category theory|higher categories]], with essentially the same meaning as $\infty$-[[infinity-category|categories]].  The distinction between the terms "$\omega$-category" and "$\infty$-category" is mostly a matter of the preference of individual authors.  One slight difference is that $\infty$-category usually seems to imply a "weak" notion, while in addition to weak $\omega$-categories there are also [[strict omega-category|strict ones]].

#Examples#

* [[Trimble n-category]]

* [[simplicial weak omega-category]]

* [[Batanin omega-category]]


#References#

See the general references at [[higher category theory]].

* Andr&eacute; Joyal, [[Tim Porter]], Peter May, _Weak categories_ ([pdf](http://www.ima.umn.edu/talks/workshops/SP6.7-18.04/may/PorterMay.pdf))



***

#Discussion#

On a previous version of the above paragraph we had the following discussion.

+--{.query}

_[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]_: Hate to start this again... but why does $\omega$-category need to imply globular and algebraic?  If it's historical precedent we care about, then at the end of Street's "The algebra of oriented simplices" he was probably the first person to use "weak $\omega$-category," and he meant a simplicial and nonalgebraic version.

_[[Todd Trimble]]_: In my book, it doesn't (and I wasn't aware there was a controversy about this in nLab or anywhere else). 

_[[Urs Schreiber|Urs]]_: My fault. For a while I had been, wrongly, under the impression that distinguishing between "$\omega$" and "$\infty$" meant _something_. I changed the above paragraph. Please, Mike, if you see remnants of this problem elsewhere on the wiki, feel free to correct it.

=--
