[_A Categorical Manifesto_]( http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.13.362 ) is an article  written by [[Joseph Goguen]], encouraging the use of category theory in computer science. To quote from his introduction:

> This paper tries to explain why category theory is useful in computing science. The
> basic answer is that computing science is a young field that is growing rapidly, is
> poorly organised, and needs all the help it can get, and that [[category theory]] can
> provide help with at least the following:
>
> * Formulating definitions and theories. In computing science, it is often 
> more
> difficult to formulate concepts and results than to give a proof. The 
> seven guidelines of this paper can help with formulation; the guidelines
> can also be
> used to measure the elegance and coherence of existing formulations.
>
> * Carrying out proofs. Once basic concepts have been correctly formulated
> in a
> categorical language, it often seems that proofs "just happen": at each 
> step,
> there is a "natural" thing to try, and it works. [[diagram chasing|Diagram chasing]] provides 
> many examples of this. It could almost be said that the purpose
> of category theory is to reduce all proofs to such simple calculations.
>
> * Discovering and exploiting relations with other fields. Sufficiently 
> abstract
> formulations can reveal surprising connections. For example, an analogy 
> between [[Petri nets]] and the [[lambda-calculus|$\lambda$-calculus]] might suggest looking for a [[closed category]] structure on the category of Petri nets.
>
> * Dealing with abstraction and representation independence. In computing 
> science, more abstract viewpoints are often more useful, because of the 
> need to
> achieve independence from the often overwhelmingly complex details of how
> things are represented or implemented. A corollary of the first guideline 
> is that two objects are "abstractly the same" if they are [[isomorphic]]. 
> Moreover, [[universal constructions]] (i.e., [[adjoints]]) define
> their results uniquely up to isomorphism, i.e., "abstractly" in just this
> sense.
>
> * Formulating conjectures and research directions. Connections with other 
> fields
> can suggest new questions in your own field. Also the seven guidelines 
> can help
> to guide research. For example, if you have found an interesting [[functor]],
> then
> you might be well advised to investigate its [[adjoints]].
>
> * Unification. Computing science is very fragmented, with many different 
> sub-disciplines having many different schools within them. Hence, we
> badly need
> the kind of conceptual unification that category theory can provide.

### Abstract ###

> This paper tries to explain why and how category theory is useful in 
> computing science, by giving guidelines for applying seven basic 
> categorical concepts: [[category]], [[functor]], [[natural transformation]], [[limit]], 
> [[adjoint]], [[colimit]] and [[comma category]]. Some examples, intuition, and 
> references are given for each concept, but completeness is not attempted. 
> Some additional categorical concepts and some suggestions for further 
> research are also mentioned. The paper concludes with some philosophical 
> discussion.

### Reference ###

* [[Joseph A. Goguen]], _A Categorical Manifesto_. In _Mathematical Structures in Computer Science_, Vol. 1, No. 1. (1991), pp. 49-67, doi:[10.1017/S0960129500000050](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0960129500000050), [CiteSeerX](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.13.362). 




category: reference, computer science