
# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A 'PROP' --- an abbreviation of 'products and permutations category' --- is a [[symmetric monoidal category]] generated by a single [[object]], used to describe a given sort of algebraic structure.  One can think of PROPs as a variant of [[Lawvere theory|Lawvere theories]] suitable for non[[cartesian monoidal category|cartesian]] contexts.  In this respect they are similar to [[operad|operads]].  However, they are more general, because they can be used to describe operations with many outputs as well as many inputs.


## Definition


+-- {: .num_defn }
###### Definition
A **PROP** is a [[symmetric monoidal category]] where every object is of the form 

$$x^{\otimes n} = x \otimes x \otimes \cdots \otimes x$$ 

for a single object $x$ and $n \ge 0$.
=--

There is also a notion of colored PROP akin to [[colored operads]]. One way to define a colored PROP is as a certain kind of [[symmetric monoidal category]] (see Remark 2.2.14 of [Yau](#Yau)):

+-- {: .num_defn }
###### Definition

A **colored PROP** with set of colors $\mathfrak{C}$ is a symmetric strict monoidal category $(P,\odot)$ whose [[monoid]] of objects is freely generated by $\mathfrak{C}$.

=-- 



+-- {: .num_defn }
###### Definition

Given a PROP $T$ and a symmetric monoidal category $C$, a [[symmetric monoidal functor]]

$$F : T \to C$$

is called an **algebra** or **model** of $T$ in $C$.  The category of algebras of $T$ in $C$, say $Alg(T,C)$, has

* symmetric monoidal functors $F : T \to C$ as objects,
* [[symmetric monoidal natural transformation|symmetric monoidal natural transformations]] as morphisms.

=--

Note that all of the above definitions can be [[enriched category|enriched]] over a [[symmetric monoidal category]] which yields the notion of enriched PROPs. For instance, we can have [[simplicially enriched category|simplicial]] and [[topologically enriched category|topological]] PROPs where the sets of morphisms are [[simplicial sets]] or [[topological spaces]]. 

## Examples

### Bialgebras 

A perhaps paradigmatic example is that there is a $Vect$-enriched prop whose algebras are bialgebras. It should be observed here that there is no $Vect$-enriched [[operad]] (or cooperad) whose algebras are bialgebras, so this is a genuine example that illustrates a gain in generality of props over operads. 

See [Pirashvili](#Pirashvili) for some more details on this prop. 

### Polycategories

Every PROP defines a [[polycategory]]; see there for more. Note that PROPs are strictly more general than polycategories since in a PROP we can compose along many objects at once. This restriction actually makes polycategories more like [[dioperads]] than PROPs (cf. [Gan](#Gan)). 

## Related concepts

* [[PRO]]
* [[polycategory]]
* [[properad]]
* [[dioperad]]

## References

* Wee Liang Gan, _Koszul Duality for Dioperads_, [arXiv:0201074v2](http://arxiv.org/pdf/math/0201074v2.pdf). 
{#Gan}

*  [[Steve Lack]], _[Composing PROPs](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/13/9/13-09abs.html)_, [[TAC]] 13 (2004), No. 9, 147--163.

* [[Donald Yau]], _Higher Dimensional Algebras via Colored PROPs_, [(arXiv:0809.2161v1)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/0809.2161v1.pdf).
{#Yau}

* Teimuraz Pirashvili, *On the PROP corresponding to bialgebras*, http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0110014. ([link](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0110014)) 

[[!redirects PROP]]
[[!redirects PROPs]]
[[!redirects prop]]
[[!redirects props]]
