
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea 

The idea of the following text is to begin with a category of objects presumed [[undirected object|undirected]] and construct from that a supercategory of directed objects, analogous to how [[Marco Grandis]] developed [[directed space|directed topological spaces]] out of the usual undirected ones.

(Rather different approaches to a notion of "directed object" will exist. See also at _[[directed homotopy theory]]_ and _[[directed homotopy type theory]]_.)

## Definition (tentative) 

Let $C$ be a category with an [[interval object]] $I$, and suppose that every object $X$ of $C$ is $I$-[[undirected object|undirected]].

To be explicit, fix a subset
$
  d_I \subset {}_{pt}hom(I,I)_{pt}
$
of the endomorphisms of the given [[interval object]] $I$ regarded as a cospan $pt \to I \leftarrow pt$ to be called the _directed endomorphisms_ of the interval object. Let $d_X\subset [I,X]$ be a subset of the [[hom-set]] $[I \to X]$.

Then we call the pair $(X, d_X)$ an *object with directed path space $d_X$* (or *directed object*) if the following conditions (attributed to Marco Grandis) are satisfied:

1. (Constant paths) Every map $I \to \pt \to X$ is directed;

2. (Reparametrisation) For $\gamma \in d_X \subset hom(I,X)$  and every $\phi \in d_I \subset hom(I,I)$, also $\gamma \circ \phi$  is in $d_X$;

3. (Concatenation) Let $a,b:I\to X$ be *consecutive wrt. $I$* (i.e. $\pt \to^{\tau} I \to^{a} X$ equals $\pt \to^{\sigma} I \to^{b} X$), let $I^{v2}$ denote the pushout of $\sigma$ and $\tau$, then by the universal property of the pushout there is a map $\phi:I^{v2}\to X$. By definition of the [[interval object]] (described there in the section "Intervals for Trimble $\omega$-categories") there is a unique morphism $\psi:I\to I^{v2}$. Then the *composition of $a$ and $b$* is defined by $a\bullet b:=\phi\circ \psi$. Then $d_X$ shall be closed under composition of consecutive paths.

We define a *morphism of objects with directed path space* to be a morphism of their underlying objects that preserves directed paths. Objects with directed path space and morphisms thereof define a category denoted by $d_I{C}$.

$C$ is a subcategory of $d_I{C}$.
## Examples 

* The category of [[directed space|directed topological spaces]] according to Grandis is of the above form $d_I{C}$ for $C = $ [[Top]], $I = [0,1]$ and $d_I = \{monotonic maps I \to I\}$.

## References

The definition and study of directed topological spaces was undertaken in

* [[Marco Grandis]], _Directed homotopy theory, I. The fundamental category_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.AT/0111048))

Applications of categories regarded as models for directed spaces are discussed in

* [[Tim Porter]]: _Enriched categories and models for spaces of evolving states_, Theoretical Computer Science, 405, (2008), pp. 88 - 100.

* [[Tim Porter]], _Enriched categories and models for spaces of
dipaths. A discussion document and overview of some techniques_ ([pdf](http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2007/898/pdf/06341.PorterTimothy.Paper.898.pdf))
