
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Discrete and concrete objects
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include discrete and concrete objects - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A _concrete category_ is a [[category]] that looks like a category of "[[set]]s with extra [[stuff, structure, property|structure]]", that is a category of [[structured sets]].


## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A __concrete category__ is a [[category]] $C$ equipped with a [[faithful functor]]
  
  $$
    U : C \to Set
  $$

to the category [[Set]]. We say a category $C$ is _concretizable_ if and only if it admits a faithful functor $U: C \to Set$. 
=-- 


+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark 

Very often it is useful to consider the case where $U$ is [[representable functor|representable]] by some [[object]] $c_0 \in C$, in that $U \simeq C(c_0,-)$. For example, this is important for the statement of various concrete [[duality|dualities]] induced by [[dual adjunctions]]. We say in this case that $(C, U: C \to Set)$ is _representably concrete_. By definition, the object $c_0$ is then a [[generator]] of the category.

We remark that the existence of a left [[adjoint functor|adjoint]] $F$ to $U: C \to Set$ implies that $U$ is representable by $F(1)$. Conversely, if $C$ has [[coproducts]] or even just [[copowers]], then representability of $U$ implies that $U$ has a left adjoint. 
=-- 


+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

One can also consider concrete categories over any base category $X$ instead of necessarily over $Set$.  This is the approach taken in [The Joy of Cats](#JoyOfCats).  Then the (small) categories concrete over $X$ form a [[2-category]] $Cat(X)$.

=--


## Examples

The following furnish examples of concrete categories, with the first three representably concrete: 

* $C = Set$ itself with generator $c_0 = \{\bullet\}$ the singleton set. 

* $C = Top$ with the generator $c_0$ taken to be the one-point space. 

* Any [[monadic functor]] $U: C \to Set$ is faithful (because it preserves equalizers and reflects isomorphisms) and has a left adjoint. As special cases, we have the usual collection of examples of concrete categories: [[monoid]]s, [[group]]s, [[ring]]s, [[algebra]]s, etc. 

A category may be concretizable in more than one way: 

* Take $ C $ to be the category of [[Banach space]]s with morphisms those (everywhere-defined) linear transformations with norm bounded (above) by $ 1 $ (so $ \| T v \| \leq \| v \| $ for all $ v $ in the source).  Then there are two versions of $ U $ that one may use: one where $ U ( V ) $ (for $ V $ a Banach space) consists of *every* vector in $ V $, and one where $ U ( V ) $ consists of those vectors bounded by $ 1 $ (so the closed unit ball in $ V $).  The first may seem more obvious at first, but only the second is representable (by a $ 1 $-dimensional Banach space). 

* Insofar as categories such as $Set$, $Top$, $Vect_k$, etc. admit many generators, these categories may be rendered representably concrete in a variety of ways. Indeed, the category $Vect_k$ may be _monadic_ over $Set$ in many different ways. For example, if $V$ is $n$-dimensional, the functor $\hom(V, -): Vect_k \to Set$ is monadic and realizes $Vect_k$ as equivalent to the category of [[modules]] over the matrix algebra $\hom(V, V)$. 

* Any Grothendieck topos is concretizable, but not necessarily (and typically not) representably concretizable. If $E = Sh(C, J)$ is the category of sheaves on a small site $(C, J)$, we have a familiar string of faithful functors 
$$Sh(C, J) \hookrightarrow Set^{C^{op}} \stackrel{monadic}{\to} Set/C_0 \stackrel{\Sigma_{C_0}}{\to} Set.$$ 
But if for example $E$ is the category of sheaves over $\mathbb{R}$, then no object $X$ can serve as a single generator of $E$, since it cannot detect differences between arrows $Y \stackrel{\to}{\to} Z$ whenever the support of $Y$ is strictly contained in the support of $X$. 

* A concrete category that is equipped with the structure of a [[site]] in a compatible way is a [[concrete site]]. The category of [[concrete sheaves]] on a concrete site is concrete. 


## Properties 

+-- {: .num_prop} 
###### Proposition 
Every small category $C$ is concretizable (since it fully and faithfully embeds in the concrete category $Set^{C^{op}}$). 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition 
If $C$ is concretizable, so is $C^{op}$. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
By assumption, there is a faithful functor $U^{op}: C^{op} \to Set^{op}$, and $\hom(-, \mathbf{2}): Set^{op} \to Set$ is monadic. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_remark} 
###### Remark 
Of course, since a category $C$ may possess a generator but no cogenerator, it does not follow that $C^{op}$ is representably concrete if $C$ is. 
=-- 

### Characterization

+-- {: .num_theorem}
###### Theorem

A [[finitely complete category]] is concretizable, i.e., admits a [[faithful functor]] to $Set$, if and only if it is [[well-powered category|well-powered]] with respect to [[regular monomorphism|regular]] [[subobject]]s.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

"Only if" was proven in ([Isbell](#Isbell)).  To prove it, note that if $F: C\to D$ is a faithful functor, then it is injective on equivalence classes of regular subobjects.  For suppose that $m\colon a \to x$ is the [[equalizer]] of $f,g\colon x\rightrightarrows y$, and $n\colon b\to x$ is the equalizer of $h,k\colon x\rightrightarrows z$.  If $F(a) \cong F(b)$ as subobjects of $F(x)$, then since $f m = g m$ and so $F(f)\circ F(m) = F(g)\circ F(m)$, we must also have  $F(f)\circ F(n) = F(g)\circ F(n)$; hence (since $F$ is faithful) $f n = g n$, so that $n$ factors through $m$.  Conversely, $n$ factors through $m$, so we have $a\cong b$ as subobjects of $x$.  Since $Set$ is regularly well-powered, it follows that any category admitting a faithful functor to $Set$ must also be so.

(Actually, Isbell proved a more general condition which applies to categories that may lack finite limits.)

"If" was proven in ([Freyd](#Freyd)).  The argument is rather more involved, passing through [[additive categories]], and is not reproduced here.

=-- 

+-- {: .num_remark} 
###### Remark 
A relatively deep application of Isbell's result is that the [[classical homotopy category]] [[Ho(Top)]] of [[topological spaces]] is _not_ concretizable, even though it is a quotient of $Top$ which _is_ concretizable. ([Freyd 70](#Freyd70))

=-- 

## Related concepts

* [[concrete object]]



## References

* _[[The Joy of Cats]]_
{#JoyOfCats}

* [[John Isbell]], _Two set-theoretical theorems in categories_, Fund. Math 53 (1963)
{#Isbell}

* {#Freyd} [[Peter Freyd]], _Concreteness_, JPAA 3 (1973)

* {#Freyd70} [[Peter Freyd]], _Homotopy is not concrete_, in _The Steenrod Algebra and its Applications_, Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics Vol. 168, Springer-Verlag, 1970, Republished in: Reprints in Theory and Applications of Categories, No. 6 (2004) pp 1-10 ([web](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/reprints/articles/6/tr6abs.html))


[[!redirects concrete category]]
[[!redirects concrete categories]]
[[!redirects CAT(X)]]
[[!redirects Cat(X)]]
