
> This entry is about the concept in topology. For _[[quotient vector spaces]]_ in linear algebras see there.

***

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
#### Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Quotient spaces
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A *quotient space* is a [[quotient object]] in some [[category]] of [[spaces]], such as [[Top]] (of [[topological spaces]]), or [[Loc]] (of [[locales]]), etc.

Often the construction is used for the quotient $X/A$ by a subspace $A \subset X$ (example \ref{QuotientBySubspace} below).

Beware that [[quotient objects]] in the [[category]] [[Vect]] of [[vector spaces]] also traditionally called 'quotient space', but they are really just a special case of [[quotient modules]], very different from the other kinds of quotient space.  However in _[[topological vector spaces]]_ both concepts come together.

## Definitions

### In $Top$

+-- {: .num_defn #QuotientTopologicalSpace}
###### Definition
**(quotient topological space)**

Let $(X,\tau_X)$ be a [[topological space]]  and let

$$
  R_\sim \subset X \times X
$$

be an [[equivalence relation]] on its underlying set. Then the _quotient topological space_  has

* as underlying set the [[quotient set]] $X/\sim$, hence the set of [[equivalence classes]],

and

* a subset $O \subset X/\sim$ is declared to be an [[open subset]] precisely if its [[preimage]] $\pi^{-1}(O)$ under the canonical [[projection map]]

  $$
    \pi \;\colon\; X \to X/\sim
  $$

  is open in $X$.

To see that this indeed does define a topology on $X/\sim$ it is sufficient to observe that taking pre-images commutes with taking unions and with taking intersections.


Often one considers this with input datum not the equivalence relation, but any [[surjection]]

$$
  \pi \;\colon\; X \longrightarrow Y
$$

of sets. Of course this identifies $Y = X/\sim$ with $(x_1 \sim x_2) \Leftrightarrow (\pi(x_1) = \pi(x_2)) $.
Hence the _quotient topology_ on the codomain set of a function out of any topological space has as open subsets
those whose pre-images are open.

Equivalently this is the _[[final topology]]_ or _[[strong topology]]_ induced on $Y$ by the function $X \to Y$, see at _[Top -- Universal constructions](Top#UniversalConstructions)_.

=--

For this construction the function $X \to Y$ need not even be surjective, and we could generalize to a [[sink]] instead of a single map; in such a case one generally says *[[final topology]]* or *[[strong topology]]*.  See also at _[[topological concrete category]]_. 




### In $Loc$

A quotient space in $Loc$ is given by a [[regular subobject]] in [[Frm]].

(More details needed.)

## Examples

+-- {: .num_example #QuotientBySubspace}
###### Example
**(quotient by a subspace)**

Let $X$ be a [[topological space]] and $A \subset X$ a [[subset]].
Consider the [[equivalence relation]] on $$X which identifies all points in $A$ with each other. The resulting quotient space (def. \ref{QuotientTopologicalSpace}) is often simply denoted $X/A$.

This kind of quotient space plays a central role in the discussion of [[long exact sequences in cohomology]], see at _[[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]]_.


=--


## Properties

+-- {: .num_defn #SubsetSaturated}
###### Definition
**([[saturated subset]])**

Let $f \;\colon\; X \longrightarrow Y$ be a [[function]] of [[sets]]. 
Then a [[subset]] $S \subset S$ is called an _$f$-[[saturated subset]]_ (or just _separated subset_, if $f$ is understood)
if $S$ is the [[pre-image]] of its [[image]]:

$$
  \left(S \subset X \,\, f\text{-saturated} \right)
    \,\Leftrightarrow\,
  \left(
    S = f^{-1}(f(S))
  \right)
  \,.
$$

=--

## Properties

1. Recall that a map $q \colon X \to Y$ is [[open map|open]] if $q(U)$ is open in $Y$ whenever $U$ is open in $X$. It is not the case that a quotient map $q \colon X \to Y$ is necessarily open. Indeed, the identification map $q \colon I \sqcup \{\ast\} \to S^1$, where the endpoints of $I$ are identified with $\ast$, takes the open point $\ast$ of the domain to a non-open point in $S^1$. 

1. Nor is it the case that a quotient map is necessarily a closed map; the classic example is the projection map $\pi_1 \colon \mathbb{R}^2 \to \mathbb{R}$, which projects the closed locus $x y = 1$ onto a non-closed subset of $\mathbb{R}$. (This is a quotient map, by the next remark.) 

1. It is easy to prove that a continuous open surjection $p \colon X \to Y$ is a quotient map. For instance, projection maps $\pi \colon X \times Y \to Y$ are quotient maps, provided that $X$ is inhabited. Likewise, a continuous closed surjection $p: X \to Y$ is a quotient map: $p^{-1}(U)$ is open $\Rightarrow$ $p^{-1}(\neg U)$ is closed $\Rightarrow$ $p(p^{-1}(\neg U)) = \neg U$ is closed $\Rightarrow$ $U$ is open. For example, a continuous surjection from a compact space to a Hausdorff space is a quotient map. 


+-- {: .num_prop #DetectViaSaturatedSubsetsContinuousQuotientMap}
###### Proposition

A [[continuous function]]

$$
  f \;\colon\; (X, \tau_X) \longrightarrow (Y,\tau_Y)
$$

whose underlying function $f \colon X \longrightarrow Y$ is [[surjective function|surjective]]
exhibits $\tau_Y$ as the corresponding [[quotient topological space|quotient topology]]
precisely if $f$ sends open and $f$-[[saturated subsets]] in $X$ to open subsets of $Y$.
By [this lemma](saturated+subset#ComplementOfSaturatedSubsetIsSaturated)  this is the case precisely if it sends
closed and $f$-saturated subsets to closed subsets.

=--




## Related pages

* [[image]]

* [[subspace]], [[subframe]]

* [[quotient]], [[quotient stack]], [[quotient type]]

[[!include universal constructions of topological spaces -- table]]


[[!redirects quotient space]]
[[!redirects quotient spaces]]
[[!redirects identification space]]
[[!redirects identification spaces]]

[[!redirects quotient topology]]
[[!redirects quotient topologies]]
[[!redirects identification topology]]
[[!redirects identification topologies]]

[[!redirects quotient locale]]
[[!redirects quotient locales]]

[[!redirects quotient topological space]]
[[!redirects quotient topological spaces]]

[[!redirects topological quotient space]]
[[!redirects topological quotient spaces]]
