
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
#### Formal geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include formal geometry -- contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Definition

A [[ring]] $R$ is said to be an **Artinian ring** if it satisfies the [[descending chain condition]] on ideals. 

Depending whether this condition is satisfied by left ideals, right ideals or two-sided ideals, one speaks of _left Artinian_, _right Artinian_, or _two-sided Artinian_ rings, respectively. Clearly, in the context of [[commutative algebra]] all these notions coincide.

A **local Artin algebra** with [[residue field]] $\mathbb{K}$ is a finitely generated $\mathbb{K}$-[[associative algebra|algebra]] $A$, which is a commutative Artin ring (with unit) with a unique maximal ideal $\mathfrak{m}_A$, such that the residue field $A/\mathfrak{m}_A$ is $\mathbb{K}$. As a $\mathbb{K}$ [[vector space]] one has a splitting $A=\mathbb{K}\oplus \mathfrak{m}_A$. Moreover, the descending chain condition implies that $(\mathfrak{m}_A)^n=0$ for some $n\gg 0$. This is a consequence of [[Nakayama lemma]]. 

## Examples

A classical example is the ring of [[dual numbers]] $\mathbb{K}[\epsilon]/(\epsilon^2)$ over a field $\mathbb{K}$.

Passing from commutative rings to their spectra (in the sense of algebraic geometry), local Artin algebras correspond to infinitesimal pointed spaces. As such, they appear as bases of deformations in [[infinitesimal object|infinitesimal]] [[deformation theory]]. For instance $Spec(\mathbb{K}[\epsilon]/(\epsilon^2))$ is the base space for 1-dimensional first order deformations. Similarly, $Spec(\mathbb{K}[\epsilon]/(\epsilon^{n+1}))$ is the base space for 1-dimensional $n$-th order deformations.

Note that, since a local Artin algebra has a unique [[prime ideal]], its spectrum consists of a single point, i.e., $Spec(A)$ is trivial as a topological space. It is however non-trivial as a ringed space, since its ring of functions is $A$. By this reason spectra of Artin algebras are occasionally called _[[infinitesimally thickened point|fat points]]_ in the literature.

## References

Local Artin $\infty$-algebras are discussed in

* [[Jacob Lurie]], _Formal moduli problems_ ([pdf](http://www.math.harvard.edu/~lurie/papers/DAG-X.pdf))

[[!redirects Artin rings]]
[[!redirects Artinian rings]]

[[!redirects Artin algebra]]
[[!redirects Artin algebras]]

[[!redirects local Artin algebra]]
[[!redirects local Artin algebras]]