#Idea#

Ordinary categories can be defined as [[monad|monads]] in the bicategory of spans of sets. Multicategories can be defined in a similar way. A [[multicategory]] is like an ordinary category where each morphism has a list of objects as its domain, and a single object as its codomain (think vector spaces and multilinear maps).

To see how a multicategory $C$ can be defined as a monad in some appropriate bicategory, let $C_0$ be the set of objects of $C$, and notice that the domain of a morphism of $C$--a finite list of objects--is an element of $T C_0$, where $T$ is the free monoid monad. In this way the data for $C$ can be conveniently organized in the diagram
\[\begin{matrix}
&&C_1&&\\
&\overset{d}\swarrow&
&\overset{c}\searrow&\\
T C_0 &&&& C_0.
\end{matrix}\]

Leinster's work is built on the idea of generalized multicategories, where the domain of a morphism can have a more general, higher dimensional shape than just a list. This is accomplished by considering a category $\mathcal{E}$ other than $\mathrm{Set}$, and a monad $T$ on $\mathcal{E}$, and mimicking the above construction. So the data for a $T$-multicategory is a digram in $\mathcal{E}$ like the one above.

To state the structure required on the data for a $T$-multicategory, we want to define a bicategory in which the above span is an endomorphism. Then a $T$-multicategory will be such a span together with structure making it a monad in that bicategory. The bicategory is $\mathcal{E}_{(T)}$, the bicategory of $T$-spans in $\mathcal{E}$. Its objects are the objects of $\mathcal{E}$, and its morphisms are spans
\[\begin{matrix}
&&M&&\\
&\overset{d}\swarrow&
&\overset{c}\searrow&\\
T E &&&& E'.
\end{matrix}\]

This won't in general be a bicategory without a few extra assumptions. Identity spans are defined using the unit $\eta: \mathrm{Id}\to T$. Composition of spans is defined using pullbacks and the multiplication $\mu: T^2\to T$, so the category $\mathcal{E}$ must at least have pullbacks--usually it will be cartesian. The associativity and unit 2-cells are defined using the universal property of the pullbacks. However, these 2-cells won't in general be invertible. In fact, it turns out that requiring the monad $T$ to be cartesian is exactly what is needed to ensure that the coherence 2-cells are isomorphisms, and hence that $T$-spans do in fact form a bicategory. Maybe this should be the "fundamental theorem of cartesian monads".

Now $T$-multicategories can be defined simply as monads in the bicategory $\mathcal{E}_{(T)}$. Then for $T$ the identity monad on $\mathrm{Set}$, $T$-multicategories are exactly ordinary categories, and for $T$ the free monoid monad on $\mathrm{Set}$, $T$-multicatories are exactly ordinary multicategories.

As an indication of how this theory is useful as a language for higher categories, take $T$ to be the free strict-$\omega$-category monad on the category of globular sets. Then $T$-multicategories with exactly one object are called globular operads, and Leinster defines one such globular operad (the initial "globular operad with contraction") for which whose algebras are weak $\omega$-categories.

#Definition#

Let $(T, \mu, \nu)$ be a
[[monad]] on a category $C$.
Specifically, $T: C \to C$ is a functor,
and $\mu: T^2 \to T$ and 
$\nu: \mathrm{Id}_C \to T$ are natural
transformations, satisfying unital and associative
axioms making $T$ a monoid in the (strict)
monoidal category $\mathrm{End}(C)$.
This monad is cartesian if

* the category $C$ has all [[pullback]]s,
* the functor $T$ preserves pullbacks,
* the natural transformations $\mu$ and $\nu$
  are cartesian.
  A natural transformation $\alpha: S \to T$
  between functors $C \to D$
  is cartesian if for each map $f: A \to B$
  in $C$, the naturality square
  \[\array{
    S A & \overset{S f}{\to} & S B \\
    \alpha_A \downarrow & & \downarrow \alpha_B \\
    T A & \underset{T f}{\to} & T B
  }\]
  is a pullback.

# Examples

* The free [[monoid]] monad $(-)^*: Set \to Set$ is cartesian. 

* The free [[category]] monad acting on [[directed graph]]s is cartesian.

* The free strict $\omega$-[[strict omega-category|category]] monad acting on [[globular set]]s, $T: Set^{G^{op}} \to Set^{G^{op}}$, is cartesian. 

#Remarks

There is some slight inconsistency in the use of
the word _cartesian_ in category theory.
Sometimes, a category is called cartesian if it [[finitely complete category|has all finite limits]];
similarly, a functor is called cartesian if it [[exact functor|preserves all finite limit]]s.
In most examples of cartesian monads, the category
$C$ has a [[terminal object]], and hence finite limits.
However, the functor $T$ almost never preserves
terminal objects.
For example, the free monoid monad on
$\mathrm{Set}$ is cartesian, as can be checked
directly, but $T 1 \simeq \mathbb{N}$ is not
a terminal object.
In this sense, a cartesian monad is really *locally* cartesian.

#References

* [[Tom Leinster]], _Higher Operads, Higher Categories_ 
  ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.CT/0305049)),
  section 4.1

* [blog comment](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/07/the_monads_hurt_my_head_but_no.html#c025402)

## Discussion ##

Here is some past discussion about the term 'cartesian'.

+--{.query}
I would call a category with all pullbacks 'locally cartesian'.  Shouldn\'t a cartesian category at least have a terminal object?  Would a terminal object make any difference here?  —[[Toby Bartels|Toby]]

I think you're right about the standard terminology.
Both Tom Leinster and Jurgen Koslowski ([pdf](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/14/7/14-07.pdf))
use the terminology above.
I'm not sure how we want to resolve this here.
I'll think about it, and look at the standard references, and fix the terminology on this page if nobody else does first.  -Patrick

How is this?  -Patrick

_[[Mike Shulman|Mike]]_: The [[Elephant]] definitely uses "cartesian" to mean "all finite limits."  However, I'm not sure how universal that is; I think at least in the past, some people have used "cartesian" to refer only to finite _products_.  I'm sure that a "cartesian object" in a 2-category has been defined to be one such that $A\to A\times A$ and $A\to 1$ have right adjoints.  Also the notion of "cartesian bicategory" refers only to finite products (and extra stuff too).  And [[cartesian monoidal category]] and [[cartesian closed category]] certainly only means finite products.  On the other hand, of course as you say, in this context "cartesian monads" only refer to pullbacks, not terminal objects and hence not products.  There is also the use of "cartesian square" to mean a pullback square, which generalizes to "cartesian morphism" in a [[Grothendieck fibration|fibration]].

_Toby_: Yes, despite the historical justification that Johnstone gives in the Elephant, I\'d stick with (what I understand to be) the usual terminology: 'cartesian' means finite products.  Then 'locally cartesian' means each slice is cartesian, hence pullbacks.  Now the term for all finite limits is 'cartesian locally cartesian' (and topologists, at least, do say things like 'connected locally connected'), but that mouthful just tells us that the time has come to say 'left exact' or 'finitely complete' instead.

_Mike_: I assume you mean that 'cartesian' means finite _products_.  "Finitely complete" is also an reasonable term meaning "having finite limits."

_Toby_: Yes, of course, fixed.
=--