
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A [[geometric morphism]] $f : \mathcal{E} \stackrel{\overset{f^*}{\leftarrow}}{\underset{f_*}{\to}} \mathcal{F}$ is called **atomic** if its [[inverse image]] $f^*$ is a [[logical functor]].

=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A [[sheaf topos]] is called **atomic** if its [[global section]] geometric morphism is atomic.

Generally, a topos over a [[base topos]] $\Gamma : \mathcal{E} \to \mathcal{S}$ is called an **atomic topos** if $\Gamma$ is atomic.

=--

+-- {: .num_note}
###### Note

As shown in prop. \ref{AtomicMeansLocallyConnected} below, every atomic morphism $f : \mathcal{E} \to \mathcal{S}$ is also a [[locally connected geometric morphism]]. The connected objects $A \in \mathcal{E}, f_! A \simeq *$ are called the **atoms** of $\mathcal{E}$.

=--

See ([Johnstone, p. 689](#Johnstone)).

## Properties

### General

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Atomic morphisms are closed under composition.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #AtomicMeansLocallyConnected}
###### Proposition

An atomic geometric morphism is also a [[locally connected geometric morphism]].

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

By <a href="http://nlab.mathforge.org/nlab/show/logical+functor#LeftRightAdjoint">this proposition</a> a logical morphism with a [[right adjoint]] has also a [[left adjoint]].

=--

+-- {: .num_prop #ConnectedAtomicImpliesHyperconnected}
###### Proposition

If an atomic morphism is also a [[connected geometric morphism|connected]], then it is even [[hyperconnected geometric morphism|hyperconnected]].
 
=--

This appears as ([Johnstone, lemma 3.5.4](#Johnstone)).

+-- {: .num_cor}
###### Corollary

Let $\mathcal{E}$ be a [[Grothendieck topos]] with [[point of a topos|enough points]]. Then $\mathcal{E}$ is a [[Boolean topos]] precisely if it is an atomic topos.

=--

This appears as ([Johnstone, cor. 3.5.2](#Johnstone)).

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

If $\Gamma^*$ logical then it preserves the isomorphism $* \coprod * \simeq \Omega$ characterizing a [[Boolean topos]] and hence $\mathcal{E}$ is Boolean if it is atomic.

For the converse...

=--


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

A [[localic geometric morphism]] is atomic precisely if it is an [[etale geometric morphism]].

=--

This appears as ([Johnstone, lemma 3.5.4 (iii)](#Johnstone)).

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Every [[etale geometric morphism]] is atomic.

=--

### Decomposition of atomic toposes

Atomic toposes decompose as [[disjoint unions]] of [[connected topos|connected]] atomic toposes. Connected atomic toposes with a [[point of a topos]] are the [[classifying toposes]] of [[localic groups]].

An example of a connected atomic topos without a [[point of a topos]] is given in ([Johnstone, example D3.4.14](#Johnstone})).

## Examples

*  A [[category of presheaves]] $Set^{\mathcal{C}^{op}}$ is atomic precisely iff $\mathcal{C}$ is a groupoid (cf. [Barr-Diaconescu (1980)](#Barr-Diaconescu80)).

* Another example of an atomic Grothendieck topos is the [[Schanuel topos]].


## References

* {#Barr-Diaconescu80}[[Michael Barr]], [[Radu Diaconescu]], _Atomic Toposes_ , JPAA **17** (1980) pp.1-24.

* [[Olivia Caramello]], _Atomic toposes and countable categoricity_ , Appl. Cat. Struc. **20** no. 4 (2012) pp.379-391. ([arXiv:0811.3547](http://arxiv.org/abs/0811.3547))

* {#Johnstone}[[Peter Johnstone]], _[[Sketches of an Elephant]] vol. 2_ , Oxford UP 2002. (section C3.5, pp.684-695)
 

[[!redirects atomic geometric morphisms]]

[[!redirects atomic topos]]
[[!redirects atomic toposes]]
[[!redirects atomic topoi]]