
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

An _axiom_ is a [[proposition]] in [[logic]] that a given [[theory]] requires to be [[true]]: every [[model]] of the theory is required to make the axiom hold true. The sense however is that an axiom is a _basic_ proposition, used to prove other propositions in the theory. 


## Definition

Given a language specified by a [[signature (in logic)]] (a collection of [[types]], [[function symbols]] and [[relation symbols]]), a [[theory]] is the collection of assertions which are derivable (using the rules of [[deduction]] of the ambient [[logic]]) from a given set of assertions, called **axioms** of the theory. In other words, a theory is generated from a set of axioms, by starting with those axioms and applying rules of deduction, much as terms in an algebraic system may be generated from a set of basic terms by applying operations. Axioms should therefore be considered as _presenting_ a theory; different axiom sets may well give the same theory. 

A formal description depends on the details of the [[logical framework|deductive system]] used to present the logic; it could be [[natural deduction]], [[sequent calculus]], a [[Hilbert system]], etc. But if we take sequent calculus, then any collection of [[sequents]] written in the given language 

$$
  \phi_1 \vdash_{\vec x} \psi_1\;,\;
  \phi_2 \vdash_{\vec x} \psi_2\;,\; \dots
$$

(asserting that "If  [[proposition]] $\phi_i$ is [[true]] in [[context]] $\vec x_i$ then also $\psi_i$ is/has to be true") can be taken as a collection of axioms for some theory. [[model|Models]] of the theory will then be those [[structure in model theory|structures]] of the language in which the axioms are interpreted as true statements. For example, a model of [[group]] theory is a structure in the language of groups for which the group theory axioms hold. 

Assuming the deductive system is [[soundness|sound]], every sequent which is the conclusion of a valid sequent deduction, starting from the axioms, will also be true in every model. And if the deductive system is also [[completeness (logic)|complete]], then every sequent of the language which is true in every model will in fact be provable from the axioms. 


## Related concepts

* [[theory]]

* [[proposition]]/[[type]] ([[propositions as types]]) 

* [[definition]]/[[proof]]/[[program]] ([[proofs as programs]])

* [[theorem]], **axiom**



## References

For instance def. D1.1.6 in 

* [[Peter Johnstone]], _[[Sketches of an Elephant]]_


[[!redirects axiom]]
[[!redirects axioms]]
