pages/6000.md, before:


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

An [[action]]

$$
  \rho : G \times X \to X
$$

of a group $G$ on a set $X$ is **transitive** if it has a single [[orbit]], i.e., if for every two points $a,b$ there exists $g\in G$ such that $b = \rho(g,a)$.  A set equipped with a transitive action of $G$ (and which is [[inhabited]]) is the same thing as a [[connected object]] in the category $G Set$.

For $k\ge 0$, an action $G \times X \to X$ is said to be **$k$-transitive** if the componentwise-action $G \times X^{\underline{k}} \to X^{\underline{k}}$ is transitive, where $X^{\underline{k}}$ denotes the set of tuples of $k$ distinct points (i.e., [[injective functions]] from $\{1,\dots,k\}$ to $X$).  For instance, an action of $G$ on $X$ is 3-transitive if any pair of triples $(a_1,a_2,a_3)$ and $(b_1,b_2,b_3)$ of points in $X$, where $a_i \ne a_j$ and $b_i \ne b_j$ for $i\ne j$, there exists $g \in G$ such that $(b_1,b_2,b_3) = (g a_1,g a_2,g a_3)$.

## Examples

* Any group $G$ acts transitively on itself by multiplication $\cdot : G \times G \to G$, which is called the (left) [[regular representation]] of $G$.

* The [[alternating group]] $A_n$ acts transitively on $\{1,\dots,n\}$ for $n \gt 2$, and in fact it acts $(n-2)$-transitively for all $n \ge 2$.

* The [[modular group]] $PSL(2,\mathbb{Z})$ acts transitively on the [[rational number|rational]] [[projective line]] $\mathbb{P}^1(\mathbb{Q}) = \mathbb{Q} \cup \{\infty\}$. The [[projective general linear group]] $PGL(2,\mathbb{C})$ acts 3-transitively on the [[Riemann sphere]] $\mathbb{P}^1(\mathbb{C})$.

## As an action on cosets

Let $\rho : G \times X \to X$ be a transitive action and suppose that $X$ is [[inhabited]].  Then $\rho$ is equivalent to the action of $G$ by multiplication on a [[coset]] space $G/H$, where the subgroup $H$ is taken as the [[stabilizer subgroup]]
$$H = G_x = \{ g \in G \mid g x = x \}$$
of some arbitrary element $x \in X$.  In particular, the transitivity of $\rho$ guarantees that the $G$-equivariant map $G/H \to X$ defined by $g H \mapsto g x$ is a bijection.  (Note that although the subgroup $H = G_x$ depends on the choice of $x$, it is determined up to conjugacy, and so the coset space $G/H$ is independent of the choice of element.)

## Related concepts

* [[combinatorial map]]

* [[homogeneous space]]

* [[torsor]]

## References

* Helmut Wielandt.  _Finite Permutation Groups_.  Academic Press, 1964.

* [Fundamental theorem of group actions](http://groupprops.subwiki.org/wiki/Fundamental_theorem_of_group_actions) on the Group Properties Wiki.

[[!redirects transitive]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 108218 Revision date: 2016-05-02 10:22:38 Page name: transitive action Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 131.220.184.222

pages/6000.md, after:


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

An [[action]]

$$
  \rho : G \times X \to X
$$

of a group $G$ on a set $X$ is **transitive** if it has a single [[orbit]], i.e., if for every two points $a,b$ there exists $g\in G$ such that $b = \rho(g,a)$.  A set equipped with a transitive action of $G$ (and which is [[inhabited]]) is the same thing as a [[connected object]] in the category $G Set$.

For $k\ge 0$, an action $G \times X \to X$ is said to be **$k$-transitive** if the componentwise-action $G \times X^{\underline{k}} \to X^{\underline{k}}$ is transitive, where $X^{\underline{k}}$ denotes the set of tuples of $k$ distinct points (i.e., [[injective functions]] from $\{1,\dots,k\}$ to $X$).  For instance, an action of $G$ on $X$ is 3-transitive if any pair of triples $(a_1,a_2,a_3)$ and $(b_1,b_2,b_3)$ of points in $X$, where $a_i \ne a_j$ and $b_i \ne b_j$ for $i\ne j$, there exists $g \in G$ such that $(b_1,b_2,b_3) = (g a_1,g a_2,g a_3)$.

A transitive action that is also [[free action|free]] is called _[[regular action|regular]]_.

## Examples

* Any group $G$ acts transitively on itself by multiplication $\cdot : G \times G \to G$, which is called the (left) [[regular representation]] of $G$.

* The [[alternating group]] $A_n$ acts transitively on $\{1,\dots,n\}$ for $n \gt 2$, and in fact it acts $(n-2)$-transitively for all $n \ge 2$.

* The [[modular group]] $PSL(2,\mathbb{Z})$ acts transitively on the [[rational number|rational]] [[projective line]] $\mathbb{P}^1(\mathbb{Q}) = \mathbb{Q} \cup \{\infty\}$. The [[projective general linear group]] $PGL(2,\mathbb{C})$ acts 3-transitively on the [[Riemann sphere]] $\mathbb{P}^1(\mathbb{C})$.

## As an action on cosets

Let $\rho : G \times X \to X$ be a transitive action and suppose that $X$ is [[inhabited]].  Then $\rho$ is equivalent to the action of $G$ by multiplication on a [[coset]] space $G/H$, where the subgroup $H$ is taken as the [[stabilizer subgroup]]
$$H = G_x = \{ g \in G \mid g x = x \}$$
of some arbitrary element $x \in X$.  In particular, the transitivity of $\rho$ guarantees that the $G$-equivariant map $G/H \to X$ defined by $g H \mapsto g x$ is a bijection.  (Note that although the subgroup $H = G_x$ depends on the choice of $x$, it is determined up to conjugacy, and so the coset space $G/H$ is independent of the choice of element.)

## Related concepts

* [[combinatorial map]]

* [[homogeneous space]]

* [[torsor]]

## References

* Helmut Wielandt.  _Finite Permutation Groups_.  Academic Press, 1964.

* [Fundamental theorem of group actions](http://groupprops.subwiki.org/wiki/Fundamental_theorem_of_group_actions) on the Group Properties Wiki.

[[!redirects transitive]]
