
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Category Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

This entry is to record the monograph 

* [[Francis Borceux]], 

  **Handbook of Categorical Algebra**

  * Vol. 1: 

    **Basic Category Theory**

    [doi:10.1017/CBO9780511525858](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511525858)

  * Vol. 2: 

    **Categories and Structures**

    [doi:10.1017/CBO9780511525865](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511525865)

  * Vol. 3: 

    **Categories of Sheaves**

    [doi:10.1017/CBO9780511525872](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511525872)

  Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications **50**

  Cambridge University Press (1994)


on [[category theory]], [[categorical algebra]] and [[topos theory]].

Book review:

* [[Peter Johnstone]], Bull. London Math. Soc. __28__:4, 440-442 ([doi:10.1112/blms/28.4.440](http://dx.doi.org/10.1112/blms/28.4.440))


## Contents

Vol. 1: Basic Category Theory

> Preface; Introduction; 1. The language of categories; 2. [[limits|Limits]]; 3. [[adjoint functor|Adjoint functors]]; 4. Generators and projectives; 5. Categories of fractions; 6. Flat functors and Cauchy completeness; 7. Bicategories and distributors; 8. [[internal category|Internal category theory]]; Bibliography; Index.

Vol. 2: Categories and Structures 

> Preface; Introduction; 1. [[abelian category|Abelian categories]]; 2. [[regular category|Regular categories]]; 3. [[algebraic theory|Algebraic theories]]; 4. [[monad|Monads]]; 5. [[accessible category|Accessible categories]]; 6. [[enriched category theory|Enriched category theory]]; 7. [[topological category|Topological categories]]; 8. [[fibered category|Fibred categories]]; Bibliography; Index.

Vol. 3: Categories of Sheaves

> Preface; Introduction; 1. [[locale|Locales]]; 2. [[sheaf|Sheaves]]; 3. [[Grothendieck toposes]]; 4. [[classifying topos|The classifying topos]]; 5. [[elementary topos|Elementary toposes]]; 6. [[internal logic|Internal logic of a topos]]; 7. [[the law of excluded middle|The law of excluded middle]]; 8. The axiom of infinity; 9. [[internal sheaf|Sheaves in a topos]]; Bibliography; Index.


category: reference

