## Definition

A __torsion theory__ in an [[abelian category]] $A$ is a couple $(T,F)$ of additive subcategories called the __torsion class__ $T$ and the __torsion free class__ $F$ such that the following conditions hold:

* $Hom(T,F) = 0$

(in other words, $A(X,Y) = 0$ if $X \in Ob T$ and $Y\in Ob F$).

* $Hom(T,Y) = 0 \Rightarrow Y\in Ob Y$

* $Hom(X,F) = 0 \Rightarrow X\in Ob X$

* for all $X\in Ob A$, there exists $Y\subset X$, $Y\in Ob T$ and $X/Y\in Ob F$

Equivalently, a torsion theory in $A$ is a pair $(T,F)$ of [[strictly full subcategories]] of $A$ such that the first and last conditions in the above list hold. Alternatively, we can require the last condition
and the following 3: $T\cap F=\emptyset$, $T$ is closed under quotients
and $F$ under subobjects.  It follows also that $T$ and $F$ are stable under extensions. 

#### Torsion part of an object

If the abelian category satisfies the Gabriel's [[property (sup)]] then for every object $X$ there exist the largest subobject $t(X)\subset X$ which is in $T$ and it is called the torsion part of $X$ (sometimes written as $X_T$). Under the axiom of choice, $t: X\to t(X)$ can be extended to a functor. 

#### Hereditary torsion theories

A torsion theory is __hereditary__ if $T$ is closed under subobjects, or equivalently, $t$ is [[left exact functor]]. 

## Properties

If $(T,F)$ is a torsion class then $T$ and $F$ both contain the zero object and are closed under biproducts (Borceux II 1.12.3). Presentation of an object $X$ in $Ob A$ as an extension $0\to Y\to X\to X/Y\to 0$,  $Y$ in $Ob T$ by $X/Y$ in $Ob F$ is unique up to an isomorphism of short exact sequences (Borceux II 1.12.4). 

Given an abelian category $A$ there is a bijection between universal closure operations on $A$, hereditary torsion theories in $A$ (Borceux II 1.12.8) and, if $A$ us locally finitely presentable also with left exact localizations of $A$ admiting a right adjoint and with localizing subcategories of $A$ (Borceux II 1.13.15). 

## Examples

The basic example of a torsion class is the class of torsion abelian groups within the category of all abelian groups. The torsion theories are often used as a means to formulate localization theory in abelian categories. 

## Literature

Comprehensive accounts are in

* Francis Borceux, _Handbook of categorical algebra_, vol. 2
* N. Popescu, _Abelian categories with applications to rings and modules_, London Math. Soc. Monographs 3, Academic Press 1973. xii+467 pp. [MR0340375](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=0340375)
* Joachim Lambek, _Torsion theories, additive semantics, and rings of quotients_, with app. by H. H. Storrer on torsion theories and dominant dimensions. Lecture Notes in Mathematics __177__, Springer-Verlag 1971, vi+94 pp. [MR284459](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=284459)
 
Historically the notion is introduced in

* Spencer E. Dickson, _A torsion theory for Abelian categories_, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. __121__, No. 1 (Jan., 1966), pp. 223-235, [jstor](http://www.jstor.org/stable/1994341) 


[[!redirects torsion theory]]