
> under construction

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A _string_ is a [[brane]] of dimension one higher than an ordinary [[particle]]:

where a 1-[[dimension]]al [[sigma-model]] may be thought of a describing the dynamics of [[particle]]s propagating of a [[target space]] $X$, a 2-dimensional [[sigma-model]] is said to described the dynamics of a string on some target space.

Much of traditional [[quantum field theory]] on $X$ can be understood in terms of [[second quantization]] of 1-dimensional [[sigma-models]] with [[target space]] $X$. What is called _[[string theory]]_ is the corresponding study of what happens to this situation as the 1-dimensional $\sigma$-model is replaced by a 2-dimensional one.

## Definition

### Bosonic string

#### In symplectic geometry / geometric quantization

##### Complex structures on loop spaces

(...)

##### Geometric prequantization

(...)

##### Geometric quantization

(...)

### Superstring

(...)

## Related concepts

* [[sigma model]], [[brane]]

  * [[particle]], [[spinning particle]], [[superparticle]]

  * [[string]], [[spinning string]], [[superstring]]

  * [[membrane]]

* [[string theory]]

## References

(... many references to go here, see at [[string theory]] for more ...)

### Symplectic geometry and geometric quantization
 {#ReferencesSymplecticGeometryAndGeometricQuantization}

The ordinary [[symplectic geometry]] and ordinary [[geometric quantization]] of the bosonic string [[sigma-model]] is discussed in the following references.

The symplectic structure [[Kähler geometry]] of [[loop space]] is discussed in 

* M.J. Bowick, S.G. Rajeev, _String theory as the Kähler geometry of loop space_ Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 535-538 (1987)

* M.J. Bowick, S.G. Rajeev, _The holomorphic geometry of closed bosonic string theory and $Diff(S^1)/S^1$_, Nucl. Phys. B293, 348-384 (1987)

* [[Jouko Mickelsson]], _String quantization on group manifolds and the holomorphic geometry of $Diff(S^1)/S^1$_ Commun. Math. Phys. 112, 653-661 (1987) ([EUCLID](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104160059))

with further comments in

* Hendrik Grundlin, C. A. Hurst, _The operator quantization of the open bosonic string: field algebra_, Communications in mathematical physics 156 (1993) ([pdf](http://web.maths.unsw.edu.au/~hendrik/String-CMP.pdf))

A correction of some points in these articles is discussed in

* [[Sergei Merkulov]], _On the geometric quantization of bosonic string_,  Class. Quantum Grav. 9 2267 (1992) ([IOP](http://iopscience.iop.org/0264-9381/9/10/010))

See also

* Yue Yua, Han-Ying Guoa, _On the geometric quantization and BRST quantization for bosonic strings_, Physics Letters B Volume 216, Issues 1–2, (1989), Pages 68–74 ([web](http://inspirehep.net/record/279613))


* Yu-liang Liu, Su-qing Chen,Guang-jiong Ni, _Geometrical quantization of bosonic string with Wess-Zumino term on genus-g Riemann surface_, Phys. Rev. D 41, 472–477 (1990) 

* A. D. Popov, _Geometric quantization of strings and reparametrization invariance_, Theoretical and Mathematical Physics, Volume 83, Number 3 (1990) ([journal](http://www.mathnet.ru/php/archive.phtml?wshow=paper&jrnid=tmf&paperid=5817&option_lang=eng))


A discussion starting systematically with the correct [[symplectic form]]  obtained by transgression from an [[multisymplectic geometry|multisymplectic]] [[extended phase space]] and including the [[BRST-complex|BRST sector]] is in

* Yue Yu, _Symplectic geometry and geometric quantization for the open bosonic string in the BRST formalism_, Physics Letters B, Volume 216, Issue 1-2, (1989) p. 75-80.
 {#Yu}


A detailed exposition of the [[multisymplectic geometry]] of the bosonic string together with its interpretation in [[2-plectic geometry]] is in

* [[John Baez]], [[Alexander Hoffnung]], [[Chris Rogers]], _Categorified Symplectic Geometry and the Classical String_ ([arXiv:0808.0246](http://arxiv.org/abs/0808.0246/))

and the appearance of the [[string Lie 2-algebra]] as the [[Heisenberg Lie 2-algebra]] of the string [[WZW-model]] in this context is discussed in 

* [[John Baez]], [[Chris Rogers]], _Categorified Symplectic Geometry and the String Lie 2-Algebra_. [arXiv:0901.4721](http://arxiv.org/abs/0901.4721).


[[!redirects strings]]
[[!redirects F1-brane]]

[[!redirects bosonic string]]
[[!redirects bosonic strings]]

[[!redirects open string]]
[[!redirects open strings]]
[[!redirects closed string]]
[[!redirects closed strings]]

[[!redirects strings]]
