
# Cross products
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

In general, the term 'cross product' is used for any operation denoted by the symbol ‘$\times$’, such as [[cartesian product]], [[direct product]], [[Tychonoff product]], or (subsuming all of these) [[product|product in a category]].

However, there is another completely different context, used in the elementary analysis of [[vector spaces]], and that is what we discuss here.  Originally isolated from the multiplication operation in [[quaternions]] as a binary operation on $\mathbb{R}^3 \simeq Im \mathbb{H}$, the cross product now has generalisations to other arities, other dimensions, and other ground fields.


## Definitions

### Classical

The **classical cross product** on the [[Cartesian space]] $\mathbb{R}^3$ is the [[bilinear function]]

$$
  (-) \times (-)\colon \mathbb{R}^3 \times \mathbb{R}^3 \to \mathbb{R}^3
$$

given by

$$ (a,b,c) \times (d,e,f) = (b e - c f, c d - a f, a e - b d) .$$

This operation is invariant under [[orthogonal group|orthogonal transformations]] and there is nothing special here about the [[real numbers]], so given any $3$-dimensional [[orientation|oriented]] [[inner product space]] $V$ over any [[field]], we have a bilinear cross product

$$
  (-) \times (-)\colon V \times V \to V
$$

given, upon choosing any oriented orthonormal basis for $V$, by the formula above.


### Binary

We have already, trivially, generalized the cross product to other ground fields.  One way to generalise it to other dimensions is to identify characteristic features as a bilinear operation and see what operations in other dimensions have these.

In this vein, a **binary cross product** on any [[inner product space]] $V$ is a [[bilinear function]]

$$
  (-) \times (-)\colon V \times V \to V
$$

such that for all $x, y\in V$ we have

1. Orthgonality: $x \times y$ is orthogonal to both $x$ and $y$; that is, $x \cdot (x \times y) = (x \times y) \cdot y = 0$.

2. Area: ${\|x \times y\|} = {\|x\|} {\|y\|}$ if $x, y$ are orthogonal.

From these, we can prove a more general formula for ${\|x \times y\|}$:

$$ {\|x \times y\|}^2 = {\|x\|}^2 {\|y\|}^2 - (x \cdot y)^2 ,$$

or equivalently

$$ {\|x \times y\|} = {\|x\|} {\|y\|} {|\sin\angle(x,y)|} .$$

(Using the [[polarization identity]] to express $x \cdot y$ in terms of $\|x\|$, $\|y\|$, and either $\|x + y\|$ or $\|x - y\|$, this is the double of Hero's Formula for the area of a triangle.)

We then have over the [[real numbers]]:

* In [[dimension]] $0$ or $1$, there is one binary cross product: $x \times y \coloneqq 0$.
* In dimension $3$, there are two binary cross products, one for each orientation, matching the classical cross product.
* In dimension $7$, there are uncountably many binary cross products.  Even fixing a basis and requiring compatibility with this, there are still hundreds of cross products.
* In any other finite dimension, there are no binary cross products at all.

These cross products exist over any base field, but as far as I know there may be additional cross products over some.  (Of course, the claim that there are uncountably many cross products in $7$ dimensions should be generalised and made more precise; the space of these inner products is some [[algebraic variety]].)

Binary cross products are closely related to [[normed division algebras]] (NDAs).  Given a normed division algebra $A$, the imaginary hyperplane $Im(A)$ inherits an inner product from $A$ and gains a cross product as
$$ x \times y \coloneqq Im(x y) = \frac{1}{2}[x,y] = x y + x \cdot y .$$
Conversely, given an inner product space $V$ with a binary cross product, the orthogonal [[direct sum]] $K \oplus V$ becomes a NDA as
$$ (a,x) (b,y) = (a b - x \cdot y, a y + b x + x \times y) ,$$
where $K$ is the ground field.

By [[Hurwitz's theorem]], the only finite-dimensional NDAs over $\mathbb{R}$ are $\mathbb{R}$ itself (the [[real numbers]]), $\mathbb{C}$ (the [[complex numbers]]), $\mathbb{H}$ (the [[quaternions]]), and $\mathbb{O}$ (the [[octonions]]).  Thus the limited possibilities for binary cross products are determined by the limited possibilities for NDA structures.


### $(n-1)$-ary

Given an [[orientation|oriented]] [[inner product space]] $V$ of finite [[dimension]] $n$, we can define the signed [[volume]] of an $n$-[[tuple]] of vectors.  (See also [[volume form]].)  This allows us to characterise a __co-unary cross product__ of $n - 1$ vectors as a multilinear operation
$$ &#x2a09;\colon V^{n - 1} \to V $$
such that
$$ &#x2a09;(v_1,\ldots,v_{n-1}) \cdot v_n = vol(v_1,\ldots,v_n) $$
always.  There is exactly one such cross product on any such $V$ (so two if we start with an unoriented inner product space).

In $3$ dimensions, this also recovers the classical cross product.


### General

In general, let a __vector-valued cross product__ on any [[inner product space]] $V$ be a multilinear function
$$ &#x2a09;\colon V^k \to V $$
for some [[natural number]] $k$ (called the [[arity]]) such that:

1. Orthgonality: $&#x2a09;(v_1,\ldots,v_k)$ is orthogonal to each $v_i$.

2. Area: ${\|&#x2a09;(v_1,\ldots,v_k)\|} = \prod_i {\|v_i\|}$ if the $v_i$ are mutually orthogonal.

We can again extend (2) to get the magnitude of the cross product of any $k$ vectors; its square is the [[determinant]] of the matrix whose $(i,j)$th entry is $v_i \cdot v_j$ (the [[Gram determinant]]).

Then for an inner product space $V$ over $\mathbb{R}$ of finite dimension $n$, we have:

* If $k = 0$, then there is no cross product.
* If $k = 1$, then there is one cross product (always $0$) in dimension $0$, two cross products in dimension $2$ (one for each orientation), and no others.
* If $k = 2$, then the possibilities are as listed above for binary cross products.
* If $k = 3$, then there is one cross product (always $0$) for $n \leq 2$, two cross products (one for each orientation) when $n = 4$, some cross products when $n = 8$ that I don\'t understand (but which are presumably related to the [[octonions]]), and no others.
* If $3 \lt k \lt n - 1$, then there are no cross products.
* If $k = n - 1$, then there are two cross products, one for each orientation, as described above.
* If $k = n$, then there are no cross products.
* If $k \gt n$, then there is one cross product, whose value is always $0$.


## Relationships

### Exterior products

The cross product is also called 'outer product', and both of these terms are sometimes also used for the [[exterior product]].  In its most basic form, the exterior product of two vectors $u,v$ is a [[bivector]] $u \wedge v$.  In $3$ dimensions, given an inner product and an orientation, we can use the [[Hodge dual]] to turn this into a vector, and this is the classical cross product once more.  In $2$ dimensions, using the same structure, we can turn the bivector into a [[scalar]]; this is sometimes called the __scalar-valued cross product__.  Actually, the scalar-valued cross product $x \times y$ in $2$ dimensions is simply the dot product $x \cdot \times{y}$, where $\times{y}$ is the unary vector-valued cross product in $2$ dimensions.  (In a counterclockwise-oriented plane, it rotates a vector clockwise by a right angle.)

Using only the inner product but not the orientation, we get (respectively) a [[pseudovector]] (sometimes called an axial vector) or a [[pseudoscalar]]; this perspective is common in [[geometric algebra]].  (In general in dimension $n$, a bivector becomes an $(n-2)$-(pseudo)-vector, but this is not usually an simplification.)

In classical applications of the cross product, often not all of the structure is needed, and the exterior product is really the fundamental concept.


### Curls

If $M$ is a [[Riemannian manifold]], then the [[tangent space]] at each point is an [[inner product space]], so it may be possible to smoothly assign a $k$-ary cross product to these spaces.  If this is done, then we can take the [[curl]] of a $(k-1)$-[[multivector|vector field]] as follows:

*  Use the metric to turn the $(k-1)$-vector field into a $(k-1)$-[[differential form|form]].
*  Take the [[exterior differential]] to get a $k$-form.
*  Use the metric again to get a $k$-vector field.
*  Apply the cross product to get a [[vector field]].

This vector field is the __curl__ of the original $(k-1)$-vector field.  This justifies the notation $\Del \times X$ for the curl.

(It\'s important that the cross product is [[alternating form|alternating]] and [[multilinear map|multilinear]], so that it makes sense to apply it to a $k$-vector rather than to $k$ individual vectors.)

When $k = 2$ and $n = 3$, there is one smooth choice of cross product for each [[orientation]] of $M$, and we recover the classical notion of curl.

When $k = 1$ and $n = 2$, we may also consider the scalar-valued curl, using the scalar-valued cross product described above.  The scalar-valued curl of a vector field $X$ is the same as the [[divergence]] of the rotated vector field $\times{X}$ (using the unary vector-valued cross product in $2$ dimensions); that is, $\Del \times X = \Del \cdot \times{X}$.


## Related concepts

* [[associative 3-form]]


## References

* The English Wikipedia article _[Seven-dimensional cross product](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven-dimensional_cross_product)_ actually covers all non-zero vector-valued cross products in finite dimensions.


[[!redirects cross product]]
[[!redirects cross products]]
[[!redirects vector product]]
[[!redirects vector products]]
[[!redirects vector cross product]]
[[!redirects vector cross products]]

[[!redirects scalar cross product]]
[[!redirects scalar cross products]]
