pages/6049.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In the context of [[string theory]] the _NS5-brane_ is a certain extended physical objects -- a [[brane]] -- that appears in/is predicted by the theory.

There are different incarnations of this object:

For instance the [[effective QFT|effective background QFT]] of the [[type II string theory|type II string]] -- [[type II supergravity]] -- admits solutions to its generalized [[Einstein equations]] which describe higher dimensional analogs of charged [[black holes]] in ordinary gravity. Among them is a 5+1-dimensional "black brane" which is [[magnetic charge|magnetically charged]] under the [[Kalb-Ramond field]]. Since the KR field and the field of [[gravity]] constituting this solution of type II supergravity have as quanta the [[worldsheet]] excitations of the [[spinning string]] [[sigma-model]] that sit in what is called the [[Neveu-Schwarz sector]] one calls this the **NS5-brane**. 

This is to distinguish it from the [[D-brane|D5-brane]] which is instead charged under the [[RR-field]] whose quanta come from the [[Ramond-Ramond sector]] of the [[superstring]].

There are other incarnations of the NS 5-brane:

by the general logic of [[Kalb-Ramond field|higher electromagnetism]] the (1+1)-dimensional string has under [[electric-magnetic duality]] a _magnetic dual_ . By dimension counting this is a 5-brane. If we think of the string this way as the structure that supports the [[sigma-model]] that defines perturbative [[string theory]],  we also call it the _F1-brane_ (the _fundamental_ 1-brane). In this sense the the corresponding magnetic dual is the _F5-brane_ -- the _fundamental_ fivebrane.

One can understand the NS5-"black brane" solution to [[type II supergravity]] as being the solitonic incarnation of the fundamental 5-brane in much the same way as an ordinary [[black hole]] in ordinary [[gravity]] is a solitonic incarnation of the [[fundamental particle]]: as the particle, the black hole it is characterized just by [[mass]], [[charge]] and [[angular momentum]]. 

Similarly, the "black" NS5-brane is characterizes by mass, [[B-field]] charge and angular momentum. 


## Properties

### Relation to little string theory

By the [[brane scan]], on the [[worldvolume]] of an NS5-brane propagates a [[superstring]]. This is called the _[[little string]]_, see there for mor.

### Relation to Khovanov homology

[[Khovanov homology]] has long been expected to appear as the [[observables]] in a 4-[[dimension]]al [[TQFT]] in higher analogy of how the [[Jones polynomial]] arises as an observable in 3-dimensional [[Chern-Simons theory]]. For instance for $\Sigma : K \to K'$ a cobordism between two [[knots]] there is a natural [[morphism]]

$$
  \Phi_\Sigma : \mathcal{K}(K) \to \mathcal{K}(K')
$$

between the Khovanov homologies associated to the two knots.

In ([Witten11](#Witten11)) it is argued, following indications in ([GukovSchwarzVafa](#GukovSchwarzVafa))
that this 4d TQFT is related to the [[worldvolume]] theory of the _image_ in [[type IIA string theory|type IIA]] of [[D3-branes]] ending on NS5-branes in [[type IIB string theory|type IIB]] after one [[S-duality]] and one [[T-duality]] operation:

$$
  (D3 - NS4)
    \stackrel{S}{\mapsto}
  (D3 - D5)
    \stackrel{T}{\mapsto}
  (D4-D6)
  \,.
$$

Earlier indication for this had come from the observation that [[Chern-Simons theory]] is the [[effective QFT|effective background theory]] for the [[A-model]] 2d [[TCFT]] (see [TCFT – Worldsheet and effective background theories](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/TCFT#ActionFunctionals) for details).

Notice that after the above [[T-duality]] operation the $(D4-D6)$-system wraps the $S^1$ ([[circle]]) along which the T-duality takes place. 

Lifting that configuration to [[11-dimensional supergravity]] gives [[M5-branes]] (the erstwhile [[D4-brane]]s) on [[Taub-NUT spacetime|Taub-NUT]] ($\times S^1$). The [[M5-branes]] wrap the circle-fiber of Taub-NUT, which shrinks to zero size at the origin (the location of the erstwhile D6, which is where the D4s "end"). The low-energy theory, on a stack of M5-branes, is the [[6d (2,0)-susy QFT]]. 

## Related concepts

* [[brane]], [[string]]

* [[fivebrane structure]], [[differential fivebrane structure]]

[[!include table of branes]]


## References

### As a black brane

The 5-brane in [[heterotic string theory]] was found as a [[black brane]] in

* {#Strominger91} [[Andrew Strominger]], _Heterotic solitons_, Nucl.Phys. B343 (1990) 167-184 Nucl.Phys. B353 (1991) 565 ([spire](http://inspirehep.net/record/27900))

* Marco Cariglia, Kurt Lechner, _NS5-branes in IIA supergravity and gravitational anomalies_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0203238](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0203238))

### As a Green-Schwarz sigma-model

See also at _[[dual heterotic string theory]]_. The [[Green-Schwarz action functionals]] for the NS5-brane are discussed in

* [[Igor Bandos]], Alexei Nurmagambetov, [[Dmitri Sorokin]], _The type IIA NS5--Brane_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0003169](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0003169))

* Daniel Persson, _Fivebrane Instantons and Hypermultiplets_ (2010) ([pdf](http://string.lpthe.jussieu.fr/QKPHYS2010/Persson.pdf))

Discussion from the point of view of [[Green-Schwarz action functional]]-[[schreiber:∞-Wess-Zumino-Witten theory]] is in

* [[Domenico Fiorenza]], [[Hisham Sati]], [[Urs Schreiber]], _[[schreiber:The brane bouquet|Super Lie n-algebra extensions, higher WZW models and super p-branes with tensor multiplet fields]]_

### Relation to the M5-brane

Most of the following references are more on the [[M5-brane]].

The fact that the worldvolume theory of the M5-brane should support fields that are [[self-dual higher gauge theory|self-dual]] [[connections on a 2-bundle]] ($\sim$ a [[gerbe]]) is discussed in 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Conformal Field Theory In Four And Six Dimensions_ ([arXiv:0712.0157](http://arxiv.org/abs/0712.0157))
 {#Witten07}

as well as sections 3 and 4 of 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Geometric Langlands From Six Dimensions_ ([arXiv:0905.2720](http://arxiv.org/abs/0905.2720))
 {#Witten09}.

A review of some aspects is in 

* [[Robbert Dijkgraaf]], _The mathematics of fivebranes_ ([pdf](http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/hep-th/pdf/9810/9810157v1.pdf))



The relation to [[Khovanov homology]] is discussed in 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Fivebranes and knots_ ([arXiv:1101.3216](http://arxiv.org/abs/1101.3216))
 {#Witten11}

* [[Sergei Gukov]], [[Albert Schwarz]], [[Cumrun Vafa]], _Khovanov-Rozansky Homology And Topological Strings_ , Lett. Math. Phys. 74 (2005) 53-74, ([arXiv:hep-th/0412243](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0412243))
 {#GukovSchwarzVafa}

See also

* [[Greg Moore]], _On the role of six‐dimensional $(2,0)$-theories in recent developments in
Physical Mathematics_ , talk at _Strings2011_ ([pdf slides](http://www-conference.slu.se/strings2011/presentations/3%20Wednesday/930_Moore.pdf))

The above discussion makes use of some blog comments (notably by [[Jacques Distler]]) appearing at

* [[Urs Schreiber]], _4d QFT for Khovanov Homology_ ([web](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2011/02/4d_qft_for_khovanov_homology.html))

[[!redirects NS-5-brane]]
[[!redirects F5-brane]]
[[!redirects F-5-brane]]
[[!redirects 5-brane]]
[[!redirects fivebrane]]

[[!redirects NS5-branes]]
[[!redirects NS-5-branes]]
[[!redirects F5-branes]]
[[!redirects F-5-branes]]
[[!redirects 5-branes]]
[[!redirects fivebranes]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 103538 Revision date: 2015-12-09 13:01:30 Page name: NS5-brane Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 78.104.9.110

pages/6049.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In the context of [[string theory]] the _NS5-brane_ is a certain extended physical objects -- a [[brane]] -- that appears in/is predicted by the theory.

There are different incarnations of this object:

For instance the [[effective QFT|effective background QFT]] of the [[type II string theory|type II string]] -- [[type II supergravity]] -- admits solutions to its generalized [[Einstein equations]] which describe higher dimensional analogs of charged [[black holes]] in ordinary gravity. Among them is a 5+1-dimensional "black brane" which is [[magnetic charge|magnetically charged]] under the [[Kalb-Ramond field]]. Since the KR field and the field of [[gravity]] constituting this solution of type II supergravity have as quanta the [[worldsheet]] excitations of the [[spinning string]] [[sigma-model]] that sit in what is called the [[Neveu-Schwarz sector]] one calls this the **NS5-brane**. 

This is to distinguish it from the [[D-brane|D5-brane]] which is instead charged under the [[RR-field]] whose quanta come from the [[Ramond-Ramond sector]] of the [[superstring]].

There are other incarnations of the NS 5-brane:

by the general logic of [[Kalb-Ramond field|higher electromagnetism]] the (1+1)-dimensional string has under [[electric-magnetic duality]] a _magnetic dual_ . By dimension counting this is a 5-brane. If we think of the string this way as the structure that supports the [[sigma-model]] that defines perturbative [[string theory]],  we also call it the _F1-brane_ (the _fundamental_ 1-brane). In this sense the the corresponding magnetic dual is the _F5-brane_ -- the _fundamental_ fivebrane.

One can understand the NS5-"black brane" solution to [[type II supergravity]] as being the solitonic incarnation of the fundamental 5-brane in much the same way as an ordinary [[black hole]] in ordinary [[gravity]] is a solitonic incarnation of the [[fundamental particle]]: as the particle, the black hole it is characterized just by [[mass]], [[charge]] and [[angular momentum]]. 

Similarly, the "black" NS5-brane is characterizes by mass, [[B-field]] charge and angular momentum. 


## Properties

### As a black brane

[[!include black branes in supergravity -- table]]


### Relation to little string theory

By the [[brane scan]], on the [[worldvolume]] of an NS5-brane propagates a [[superstring]]. This is called the _[[little string]]_, see there for mor.

### Relation to Khovanov homology

[[Khovanov homology]] has long been expected to appear as the [[observables]] in a 4-[[dimension]]al [[TQFT]] in higher analogy of how the [[Jones polynomial]] arises as an observable in 3-dimensional [[Chern-Simons theory]]. For instance for $\Sigma : K \to K'$ a cobordism between two [[knots]] there is a natural [[morphism]]

$$
  \Phi_\Sigma : \mathcal{K}(K) \to \mathcal{K}(K')
$$

between the Khovanov homologies associated to the two knots.

In ([Witten11](#Witten11)) it is argued, following indications in ([GukovSchwarzVafa](#GukovSchwarzVafa))
that this 4d TQFT is related to the [[worldvolume]] theory of the _image_ in [[type IIA string theory|type IIA]] of [[D3-branes]] ending on NS5-branes in [[type IIB string theory|type IIB]] after one [[S-duality]] and one [[T-duality]] operation:

$$
  (D3 - NS4)
    \stackrel{S}{\mapsto}
  (D3 - D5)
    \stackrel{T}{\mapsto}
  (D4-D6)
  \,.
$$

Earlier indication for this had come from the observation that [[Chern-Simons theory]] is the [[effective QFT|effective background theory]] for the [[A-model]] 2d [[TCFT]] (see [TCFT – Worldsheet and effective background theories](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/TCFT#ActionFunctionals) for details).

Notice that after the above [[T-duality]] operation the $(D4-D6)$-system wraps the $S^1$ ([[circle]]) along which the T-duality takes place. 

Lifting that configuration to [[11-dimensional supergravity]] gives [[M5-branes]] (the erstwhile [[D4-brane]]s) on [[Taub-NUT spacetime|Taub-NUT]] ($\times S^1$). The [[M5-branes]] wrap the circle-fiber of Taub-NUT, which shrinks to zero size at the origin (the location of the erstwhile D6, which is where the D4s "end"). The low-energy theory, on a stack of M5-branes, is the [[6d (2,0)-susy QFT]]. 

## Related concepts

* [[brane]], [[string]]

* [[fivebrane structure]], [[differential fivebrane structure]]

[[!include table of branes]]


## References

### As a black brane

The 5-brane in [[heterotic string theory]] was found as a [[black brane]] in

* {#Strominger91} [[Andrew Strominger]], _Heterotic solitons_, Nucl.Phys. B343 (1990) 167-184 Nucl.Phys. B353 (1991) 565 ([spire](http://inspirehep.net/record/27900))

* Marco Cariglia, Kurt Lechner, _NS5-branes in IIA supergravity and gravitational anomalies_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0203238](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0203238))

### As a Green-Schwarz sigma-model

See also at _[[dual heterotic string theory]]_. The [[Green-Schwarz action functionals]] for the NS5-brane are discussed in

* [[Igor Bandos]], Alexei Nurmagambetov, [[Dmitri Sorokin]], _The type IIA NS5--Brane_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0003169](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0003169))

* Daniel Persson, _Fivebrane Instantons and Hypermultiplets_ (2010) ([pdf](http://string.lpthe.jussieu.fr/QKPHYS2010/Persson.pdf))

Discussion from the point of view of [[Green-Schwarz action functional]]-[[schreiber:∞-Wess-Zumino-Witten theory]] is in

* [[Domenico Fiorenza]], [[Hisham Sati]], [[Urs Schreiber]], _[[schreiber:The brane bouquet|Super Lie n-algebra extensions, higher WZW models and super p-branes with tensor multiplet fields]]_

### Relation to the M5-brane

Most of the following references are more on the [[M5-brane]].

The fact that the worldvolume theory of the M5-brane should support fields that are [[self-dual higher gauge theory|self-dual]] [[connections on a 2-bundle]] ($\sim$ a [[gerbe]]) is discussed in 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Conformal Field Theory In Four And Six Dimensions_ ([arXiv:0712.0157](http://arxiv.org/abs/0712.0157))
 {#Witten07}

as well as sections 3 and 4 of 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Geometric Langlands From Six Dimensions_ ([arXiv:0905.2720](http://arxiv.org/abs/0905.2720))
 {#Witten09}.

A review of some aspects is in 

* [[Robbert Dijkgraaf]], _The mathematics of fivebranes_ ([pdf](http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/hep-th/pdf/9810/9810157v1.pdf))



The relation to [[Khovanov homology]] is discussed in 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Fivebranes and knots_ ([arXiv:1101.3216](http://arxiv.org/abs/1101.3216))
 {#Witten11}

* [[Sergei Gukov]], [[Albert Schwarz]], [[Cumrun Vafa]], _Khovanov-Rozansky Homology And Topological Strings_ , Lett. Math. Phys. 74 (2005) 53-74, ([arXiv:hep-th/0412243](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0412243))
 {#GukovSchwarzVafa}

See also

* [[Greg Moore]], _On the role of six‐dimensional $(2,0)$-theories in recent developments in
Physical Mathematics_ , talk at _Strings2011_ ([pdf slides](http://www-conference.slu.se/strings2011/presentations/3%20Wednesday/930_Moore.pdf))

The above discussion makes use of some blog comments (notably by [[Jacques Distler]]) appearing at

* [[Urs Schreiber]], _4d QFT for Khovanov Homology_ ([web](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2011/02/4d_qft_for_khovanov_homology.html))

[[!redirects NS-5-brane]]
[[!redirects F5-brane]]
[[!redirects F-5-brane]]
[[!redirects 5-brane]]
[[!redirects fivebrane]]

[[!redirects NS5-branes]]
[[!redirects NS-5-branes]]
[[!redirects F5-branes]]
[[!redirects F-5-branes]]
[[!redirects 5-branes]]
[[!redirects fivebranes]]
