pages/6113.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Definition

For $X$ a [[pointed object|pointed]] [[topological space]], its **suspension spectrum** $\Sigma^\infty X$ is the [[spectrum]] given by the pre-spectrum whose degree-$n$ space is the $n$-fold [[reduced suspension]] of $X$:

$$
  (\Sigma^\infty X)_n = \Sigma^n X
  \,.
$$

(e.g. [Elmendorf-Kriz-May, example 1.1](#ElmendorfKrizMay))

As a [[symmetric spectrum]]: ([Schwede 12, example I.2.6](#Schwede12))

## Properties

### Relation to looping and stabilization

As an [[infinity-functor]] $\Sigma^\infty\colon Top_* \to Spec$ the suspension spectrum functor exhibits the [[stabilization]] of [[Top]].

$$
  (\Sigma^\infty \dashv \Omega^\infty)\colon 
  Top_* \stackrel{\overset{\Omega^\infty}{\leftarrow}}{\underset{\Sigma^\infty}{\to}}
  Spec
$$


### Recognition and diagonals

(...)

## Related concepts

* [[equivariant suspension spectrum]]

## References

* {#ElmendorfKrizMay} [[Anthony Elmendorf]], [[Igor Kriz]], [[Peter May]], example 1.1 of _[[Modern foundations for stable homotopy theory]]_, in [[Ioan Mackenzie James]], _[[Handbook of Algebraic Topology]]_, Amsterdam: North-Holland (1995) pp. 213–253,  ([pdf](http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/Elmendorf-Kriz-May/modern_foundations.pdf))


* {#Kuhn84} Nicholas J. Kuhn, _Suspension spectra and homology equivalences_, Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc. 283, 303–313 (1984) ([JSTOR](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2000005))

* {#Klein02} [[John Klein]], _Moduli of suspension spectra_ ([arXiv:math/0210258](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0210258), [MO](http://mathoverflow.net/a/84686/381))

* {#Schwede12} [[Stefan Schwede]], Example I.2.6 in _Symmetric spectra_, 2012 ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/~schwede/SymSpec.pdf))


Suspension spectra of [[infinite loop spaces]] are discussed (in a context of [[Goodwillie calculus]] and [[chromatic homotopy theory]]) in 

* Nicholas J. Kuhn, section 6.2 of _Goodwillie towers and chromatic homotopy: An overview_ ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/people/faculty/doug/otherpapers/KuhnKinosaki.pdf))

[[!redirects suspension spectrum]]
[[!redirects suspension spectra]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 105005 Revision date: 2016-02-03 06:47:22 Page name: suspension spectrum Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 195.37.209.180

pages/6113.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Definition

For $X$ a [[pointed object|pointed]] [[topological space]], its **suspension spectrum** $\Sigma^\infty X$ is the [[spectrum]] given by the pre-spectrum whose degree-$n$ space is the $n$-fold [[reduced suspension]] of $X$:

$$
  (\Sigma^\infty X)_n = \Sigma^n X
  \,.
$$

(e.g. [Elmendorf-Kriz-May, example 1.1](#ElmendorfKrizMay))

As a [[symmetric spectrum]]: ([Schwede 12, example I.2.6](#Schwede12))

## Properties

### Completion to an $\Omega$-spectrum

See at [Omega spectrum -- Completion of a suspension spectrum](Omega-spectrum#CompletionOfSuspensionSpectra).

### Relation to looping and stabilization

As an [[infinity-functor]] $\Sigma^\infty\colon Top_* \to Spec$ the suspension spectrum functor exhibits the [[stabilization]] of [[Top]].

$$
  (\Sigma^\infty \dashv \Omega^\infty)\colon 
  Top_* \stackrel{\overset{\Omega^\infty}{\leftarrow}}{\underset{\Sigma^\infty}{\to}}
  Spec
$$


### Recognition and diagonals

(...)

## Related concepts

* [[equivariant suspension spectrum]]

## References

* {#ElmendorfKrizMay} [[Anthony Elmendorf]], [[Igor Kriz]], [[Peter May]], example 1.1 of _[[Modern foundations for stable homotopy theory]]_, in [[Ioan Mackenzie James]], _[[Handbook of Algebraic Topology]]_, Amsterdam: North-Holland (1995) pp. 213–253,  ([pdf](http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/Elmendorf-Kriz-May/modern_foundations.pdf))


* {#Kuhn84} Nicholas J. Kuhn, _Suspension spectra and homology equivalences_, Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc. 283, 303–313 (1984) ([JSTOR](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2000005))

* {#Klein02} [[John Klein]], _Moduli of suspension spectra_ ([arXiv:math/0210258](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0210258), [MO](http://mathoverflow.net/a/84686/381))

* {#Schwede12} [[Stefan Schwede]], Example I.2.6 in _Symmetric spectra_, 2012 ([pdf](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/~schwede/SymSpec.pdf))


Suspension spectra of [[infinite loop spaces]] are discussed (in a context of [[Goodwillie calculus]] and [[chromatic homotopy theory]]) in 

* Nicholas J. Kuhn, section 6.2 of _Goodwillie towers and chromatic homotopy: An overview_ ([pdf](http://www.math.rochester.edu/people/faculty/doug/otherpapers/KuhnKinosaki.pdf))

[[!redirects suspension spectrum]]
[[!redirects suspension spectra]]
