
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
#### Contents
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Searching the nLab

There are two methods of searching the nLab:

1. **The built-in search.**  This is via the search box at the top of every page.  The distinguishing characteristics of this search are:
   1. It uses _regular expressions_.
   1. It searches the _source_ of each page.

1. **An external search engine.** Most search engines allow you to restrict the search to a single site.  The best site to use for the nLab is `http://ncatlab.org/nlab`.  The distinguishing characteristics of an external search are:
   1. Most just search for alphanumeric characters.
   1. It searches the _rendered version_ of each page.


## Google Search

+-- {: .standout style="text-align: center"}
 *Search the nLab using Google:*
 <form  name="gsearch" method="get" action="http://www.google.com/search"><input type="text" size="30" name="as_q" style="display: inline"/><input type="hidden" name="as_sitesearch" value="http://ncatlab.org/nlab/"/></form>
=--


## Regular Expressions

Regular expressions are a powerful way of extending search capabilities to take into account that one often wants to search for more than just a set phrase.  In a regular expression, certain characters are declared to be "special" and have a particular interpretation (somewhat like TeX with its special catcodes).  A special character can always be "escaped" to interpret it as an ordinary character.  Thus `.` means "match any single character" but `\.` means "match a period".

As Instiki is written in ruby, it uses the ruby version of regular expressions (each language has its own version; the differences are usually minor).  The following is based on the list at [ruby-doc](http://www.ruby-doc.org/docs/ProgrammingRuby/html/language.html#UJ).  It has been condensed slightly to those aspects likely to be of use here:

Special characters
: The special characters are: `.`, `|`, `(`, `)`, `[`, `\`, `^`, `{`, `+`, `$`, `*`, and `?`. To match one of these characters, precede it with a backslash.  All other characters ordinarily just match themselves unless they are made somehow special by one of the special characters.

`\b`, `\B`
: Match word boundaries and nonword boundaries respectively.  Thus `cat` matches against `category` and `cat` but `cat\b` only matches `cat` (and `scat`).

`[character list]`
: This matches against a single character in the list.  The characters `|`, `(`, `)`, `[`, `^`, `$`, `*`, `?` are treated as regular characters in such a list.  You can specify a range using `-`: thus, `a-z`.  To include a `]` or `-` it must come at the start of the list.  A `^` at the start negates the list.

`\d`, `\s`, `\w`
: These match, respectively, digits, spaces, and word characters.

`\D`, `\S`, `\W`
: These are the negations of the lowercase versions.

`.` (period)
: Matches any character except a newline.

`(...)`
: Parentheses group pieces of the regular expression.  This is important for the following modifications.  In these, `re` stands for a sub-expression which can be a single character, a `[...]`, or a grouped expression.

`re*`
: Matches zero or more occurrences of `re`.  Thus `ab*` matches `a`, `ab`, `abb`, and so forth.  Similarly, `(cat)*` matches `cat`, `catcat`, `catcatcat`, and so forth.  This will try to match as much as possible; use `re*?` to make it match as little as possible.

`re+`
: Matches one or more occurrences of `re`.  Thus `ab+` matches `ab`, `abb`, but not `a`.  This will try to match as much as possible; use `re+?` to make it match as little as possible.


`re{m,n}`
: Matches at least `m` and at most `n` occurrences of re.  This will try to match as much as possible; use `re{m,n}?` to make it match as little as possible.

`re?`
: Matches zero or one occurrence of `re`.

`re1|re2`
: Matches either `re1` or `re2`.


[[!redirects Searching nLab]]
[[!redirects searching nLab]]
[[!redirects Searching the nLab]]
[[!redirects searching the nLab]]
[[!redirects Searching in the nLab]]
[[!redirects searching in the nLab]]

category: meta
