
# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Character on a group

There are many notions of a character for an algebraic structure, often topologized. A character on the [[group]] $G$ is a [[homomorphism]] into the group of units (invertible elements) of the [[ground field]]. Regarding that the codomain is abelian, the set of characters is an abelian group under the pointwise multiplication.

For [[topological groups]] one considers continuous characters. Specifically, for a [[locally compact Hausdorff]] group $G$ (often further assumed to be an [[abelian group]]), a __character__ of $G$ is continuous homomorphism to the [[circle]] group $\mathbb{R}/\mathbb{Z}$. If $G$ is [[profinite group|profinite]], then this is the same as an continuous homomorphism to the [[discrete space|discrete]] group $\mathbb{Q}/\mathbb{Z}$.  (See [MO](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/86089/two-definitions-of-character-of-topological-groups).)


## Character of a representation

In [[representation theory]], one defines the character of a representation $\rho\colon G\to End(V)$ to be the function on $G$ given by $g \mapsto Tr \rho(g)$, whenever the [[trace]] in $V$ makes sense (e.g. when $V$ is finite-dimensional).  Since such a function is invariant under conjugation, we may equivalently consider it a function on the set of conjugacy classes of elements in $G$.

Sometimes we also extend a character linearly to the free vector space on the set of conjugacy classes.  This version of the character can be identified with the [[bicategorical trace]] of the identity map of the representation, considered as a $k[G]$-$k$-module.

There is a different notion of an _infinitesimal character_ in [[Harish–Chandra theory]] and also a notion of the _formal character_.

There are important formulas concerning characters in representation theory, like Weyl character formula, Kirillov character formula, Demazure character formula and so on.  There is also a formula for the [[induced character]] of an [[induced representation]].


## Character of a topological space

The character $\chi(X,x)$ of a [[topological space]] $X$ at a point $x$ is the minimal cardinality of a local basis of neighborhoods of point $x$ (local [[topological basis|basis of topology]] on $X$) if it is infinite and aleph zero otherwise. The character of a topological space is the supremum of $\chi(X,x)$ when $x$ runs through $X$. 


[[!redirects character]]
[[!redirects characters]]

[[!redirects group character]]
[[!redirects group characters]]
