Let $X$ be a set of symbols. The free associative $k$-algebra $k\langle X \rangle$ on the set $X$ where $k$ is commutative unital ring, will be denoted $A(X)$. It is clearly graded (by the length of the word) as $A(X) = \oplus_n A^n(X)$. The product of $k$-modules $\hat{A}(X) = \prod_n A^n(X)$ has a natural multiplication 

$$
(ab)_n = \sum_{i = 0}^n a_i b_{n-i}
$$

where $a = (a_n)_n$ and $b = (b_n)_n$. Furthermore, $\hat{A}(X)$ has the topology of the product of discrete topological spaces. This makes $\hat{A}(X)$ a Hausdorff topological algebra, where 
the ground field is considered discrete and $A(X)$ is dense in $\hat{A}(X)$. We say that $\hat{A}(X)$ is the __Magnus algebra__ with coefficients in $k$. (Bourbaki-Lie gr. II.5). 

Element in $\hat{A}(X)$ is invertible (under multiplication) iff it's free term is invertible in $k$. 

The __Magnus group__ is the (multiplicative) subgroup of the Magnus algebra consisting of all elements in the Magnus algebra with free 
term $1$. 

The [[free Lie algebra]] $L(X)$ naturally embeds in (the Lie algebra corresponding to the associative algebra) $A(X)\hookrightarrow \hat{A}(X)$; one defines $\hat{L}(X)$ as the closure of $L(X)$ in $\hat{A}(X)$. The exponential series and the makes sense in $\hat{A}(X)$; when restricted to $\hat{L}(X)$ it gives a bijection between $\hat{L}(X)$ and a closed subgroup of the Magnus group which is sometimes called the Hausdorff group $exp(\hat{L}(X))$.  

__Hausdorff series__ $H(U,V)$ is an element $log(exp(U)exp(V))$ in $\hat{L}(\{U,V\})$. 

The specializations of the Hausdorff series 
in Lie algebras which are not necessarily free are known as 
the __Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff__ series and play the role in the corresponding BCH formula $exp(U)exp(V) = exp(H(U,V))$. 

The BCH formula can be written in many ways, the most important which belong to Dynkin. The part which is linear in one of the variables involves [[Bernoulli number]]s.

* [[N. Bourbaki]], _Lie groups and algebras_, chapter II
* [[M M Postnikov]], Lectures on geometry, Semester V, Lie groups and algebras
* E. B. Dynkin, _Calculation of the coeffients in the Campbell-Hausdorff formula_, Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.) 57, 323-326, (1947).

cf. [[Malcev completion]] 

* Anton Alekseev, Charles Torossian, _The Kashiwara-Vergne conjecture and Drinfeld's associators_, [pdf](http://www.math.jussieu.fr/~torossian/AT1.pdf)

[[!redirects Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff series]]

