
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### $\infty$-Lie theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-Lie theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea

What is called the "BRST complex" in the [[physics]] literature is the [[Lie infinity-algebroid|qDGCA]] which is the [[Chevalley-Eilenberg algebra]] of the $L_\infty$-[[Lie infinity-algebroid|algebroid]] which is the differential version in [[Lie theory]] of the $\infty$-groupoid 

 * whose space of objects is the space of configurations/histories of a given physical system;

 * whose morphisms describe the gauge transformations between these configurations/histories;

 * whose $k$-morphisms describe the $k$-fold gauge-of-gauge transformations.

The generators of the BRST complex are called

 * in degree 0: **fields**;

 * in degree 1: **[[ghost field]]**;

 * in degree 2: **[[ghost-of-ghost fields]]**;

 * etc.

The [[cochain cohomology]] of the BRST complex is called, of course, _BRST cohomology_.

## Examples
 {#Example}

### Gauge theory of a Lie algebra valued connection

We discuss the BRST complex for a field theory such as [[Yang-Mills theory]] or [[Chern-Simons theory]] whose [[configuration space]] is one of [[connection on a bundle|connections]] on $G$-[[principal bundles]] for some [[Lie group]] $G$ -- the _[[gauge group]]_ . 


#### The BRST complex

For simplicity of the exposition we first restrict attention to the cases where the underlying bundles are trivial. 

In that case, over a [[smooth manifold]] $X$, 

* a field configuration is a [[differential form]] $A$ on $X$ with values in the [[Lie algebra]] $\mathfrak{g}$ of $G$, 

  $$
    A \in \Omega^1(X, \mathfrak{g})
  $$

* a [[gauge transformation]] $A_1 \stackrel{g}{\to} A_2$ between two field configurations $A_1$ and $A_2$ is given by a [[smooth function]] $g : X \to G$ such that

  $$  
    A_2 = g^{-1} A_1 g + g^{-1} d_{dR} g
    \,.
  $$

Eventually we want to say that the full [[configuration space]] is therefore the [[groupoid of Lie algebra valued 1-forms]] on $X$, but we will be interested now only in the [[infinitesimal space|infinitesimal]] approximation to the gauge transformations. Since the infinitesimal approximation of a Lie group is its [[Lie algebra]], these infinitesimal gauge transformations are given by smooth functions $\lambda : X \to \mathfrak{g}$ from $X$ to the Lie algebra of $G$, relating field configurations by

\[
  \label{InfinitesimalGaugeTransformation}
  A_2 = [A_1, \lambda] + d \lambda 
  \,.
\]

To see in more detail what this equation means, we choose a [[basis]] $\{t_a\}$ for the [[vector space]] $\mathfrak{g}$ that underlies the Lie algebra. In terms of this basis the Lie bracket is defined by its structure constants $\{C^a{}_{b c} \in \mathbb{R}\}$ defined by

$$
  [t_b, t_c] = C^a{}_{b c} t_a
  \,.
$$ 

In terms of this, a field configuration decomposes into components $\{A^a \in \Omega^1(X)\}$ defined by

$$
  A = A^a t_a \in \Omega^1(X,\mathfrak{g}) \simeq \Omega^1(X)\otimes \mathfrak{g}
$$

and the equation (eq:InfinitesimalGaugeTransformation) for infinitesimal gauge transformations reads equivalently

$$
  A_2^a = C^a{}_{b c} A_1^b \lambda^c + d_{dR} \lambda^a
  \,.
$$

The BRST complex is a [[cochain complex]] of functions -- on this configuration space and on these gauge transformations. 

A typical smooth function on the space $\Omega^1(X,\mathfrak{g})$ of field configurations is the function that evaluates a field configuration at some point $x \in X$ on some vector $\frac{\partial}{\partial x^\mu}$ and picks the resulting component of $t_a$. We write for this

$$
  \mathbf{A}^a_\mu(x) : \Omega^1(X,\mathfrak{g}) \to \mathbb{R}
$$

$$
  A \mapsto A^a_\mu(x)
  \,.
$$

Analogously we have functions on the space $\Omega^0(X,\mathfrak{g})$ of gauge transformations that evaluate at a point $x$ and pick the component of $t_a$. These we write

$$
  \mathbf{c}^a (x) : \Omega^0(X, \mathfrak{g}) \to \mathbb{R}
$$

$$ 
  \lambda \mapsto \lambda^a(x)  
  \,.
$$

Moreover, there exists smooth functions of this kind that evaluate not $A$ or $\lambda$ themselves, but some [[derivative]] of them.

The general kind of functions on the configuration space and on the space of gauge transformation that we want to consider can be thought of as being generated by such _[[variational bicomplex|local functions]]_ .

But since the $\mathbf{c}^a(x)$ are functions on gauge transformations, which are [[1-morphism]]s in the [[groupoid of Lie algebra valued forms]], while the $\mathbf{A}^a(x)$ are functions on ordinary elements of this groupoid ([[0-morphisms]]) we declare them to be in degree 1, too. 

( Fundamentally what is going in here is that we form "[[function algebras on ∞-stacks]]" where the [[∞-stack]] in question is the [[action Lie algebroid]] $\Omega^1(X,\mathfrak{g})//\Omega^0(X, \mathfrak{g})$). 

In other words, we regard the smooth functions on field configurations and on gauge transformations as forming a $\mathbb{N}$-[[graded algebra]], where

* functions like $\mathbf{A}^a_\mu(x)$, $C^a{}_{b c}\mathbf{A}^a_\mu(x) \mathbf{A}^b_\nu(x) : \Omega^1(X,\mathfrak{g}) \to \mathbb{R}$ etc. are in degree 0;

* functions like $\mathbf{c}^a(x)$, $C^a{}_{b c}\mathbf{c}^a(x) \mathbf{A}^b_\mu(x) : \Omega^1(X,\mathfrak{g}) \to \mathbb{R}$ etc. are in degree 1;

* functions like $C^a{}_{b c}\mathbf{c}^a(x) \mathbf{c}(x)$ are in degree 2;

* etc. 

Moreover, we declare the elements in degree 1 to anticommute with each other

$$
  \mathbf{c}^a(x)\mathbf{c}^b(x) = 
  -
  \mathbf{c}^b(x)\mathbf{c}^a(x)
  \,.
$$

So far this describes a [[graded algebra]] of functions. What is still missing is the information encoded in equation (eq:InfinitesimalGaugeTransformation), which links the gauge transformations with the field configurations that they act on. 

By that formula, if we evaluate the functional $\mathbf{A}^a_\mu(x)$ not on a field $A$ itself, but the gauge transformation of this field by some $\lambda$, then the result is not $A^a_\mu(x)$ but $C^a{}_{b c} A^b_\mu(x)\lambda^c(x) + (d\lambda)_\mu^a(x)$. Therefore on gauge transformed fields the functional $\mathbf{A}^a_\mu(x)$ is replaced by

$$
  \mathbf{A}^a_\mu(x) \mapsto 
  d_{BSRT}\mathbf{A}^a_\mu(x)
  := 
C^a{}_{b c} \mathbf{A}^b_\mu(x) \mathbf{c}^c(x) + d \mathbf{c}^a  
  \,.
$$

A similarly analysis shows that 

$$
  d_{BRST} \mathbf{c}^a(x) = 
  -\frac{1}{2}C^a{}_{b c} \mathbf{c}^b(x) \mathbf{c}^c(x)
  \,.
$$

This operation $d_{BRST}$ of "shifting functionals of fields and gauge transformations by infinitesimal gauge transformations" promotes the [[graded algebra]] constructed so far to a [[differential graded algebra]]. This is the BRST-complex of the given system.

In a precise sense, this differential graded algebra encodes the [[Lie algebroid|infinitesimal]] [[groupoid of Lie algebra valued 1-forms]] that it is an algebra of functions on in the same way that an algebra of functions on some manifold characterizes that manifold.

#### Observables

Using the above discussion, we can now deduce the [[observable]]s on the configurations of the gauge theory in question. 

First notice that if we had no gauge transformations, then configuration space would be an ordinary manifold $X$, and an observable would be simply a function 

$$
  O : X \to \mathbb{R}
$$

on that space, namely, an assignment of a number to each field configuration (say the energy or momentum, assigned to each field configuration).

In the case at hand now the configuration space is not quite the manifold $\Omega^1(X, \mathfrak{g})$, but is that manifold equipped with the information of the infinitesimal gauge transformations in $\Omega^0(X,\mathfrak{g})$. One way to say this is that the configuration space now is the [[action Lie algebroid]] $\Omega^1(X,\mathfrak{g})//\Omega^0(X, \mathfrak{g})$ and that an observable is hence a function

$$
  O
  :
  \Omega^1(X, \mathfrak{g})//\Omega^0(X,\mathfrak{g})
  \to 
  \mathbb{R}
  \,.
$$

One can understand what this means in terms of [[functor]]s between [[groupoids]]. But the BRST complex provides an algebraic way of talking about this situation, and this is what we look at here.

So we need to formulate these maps between generalized manifolds algebraically. This is straightforward for the familiar case of manifolds:

any [[smooth function]] of smooth manifolds $f : X \to Y$ induces [[Isbell duality|dually]] a [[homomorphism]] of their algebras of smooth functions, which goes the other way round 

$$
  f^* : C^\infty(Y) \to C^\infty(X)
  \,.
$$

And in fact such a morphism of algebras characterizes the smooth function that it comes from. Therefore we can speak of morphisms of manifolds dually in terms of their algebras of functions. An observable on some configuration manifold $X$ is therefore equivalently an algebra homomorphism

$$
  C^\infty(X) \leftarrow C^\infty(\mathbb{R}) : O^*
  \,.
$$

This may be most familiar from [[algebraic geometry]], where one considers bare rings of functions, without any smooth structure. For the application to physics we usually want to keep track of the smooth structure. This works seamlessly if we simply replace the notion of _algebra_ by that of _[[smooth algebra]]_ . 

In any case, we can now grasp the way in which the configuration space of a gauge theory is not an ordinary manifold in terms of its dual function algebra: the BRST complex that we have described above is the function algebra on that configuration space, but it is not a plain algebra (or [[smooth algebra]]), but in fact a [[dg-algebra]], in that it carries a grading and a differential. One therefore also says that the configuration space of a gauge theory is a _[[dg-manifold]]_ .

Therefore, if we write $C^\infty(\Omega^1(X, \mathfrak{g})//\Omega^0(X, \mathfrak{g}))$ for our BRST complex, we find that an observable now is a homomorphism

$$
C^\infty(\Omega^1(X, \mathfrak{g})//\Omega^0(X, \mathfrak{g}))
  \leftarrow
  C^\infty(\mathbb{R})
  : 
  O^*
  \,.
$$

But, clearly, this is now to be regarded as a homomorphism of [[dg-algebra]]s. We may regard any ordinary algebra, such as $C^\infty(\mathbb{R})$, as a dg-algebra by taking all its elements to be in degree 0 and taking its differential to vanish (to take the value 0 on all elements).

Since a homomorphism of [[dg-algebra]]s preserves the grading and intertwines the differential, this implies two things.

1. The morphism $O^*$ needs to send every element of $C^\infty(\mathbb{R})$ to an element of degree-0 in our BRST complex. As we have seen, these elements of degree 0 formed the algebra of functions $C^\infty(\Omega^1(X,\mathfrak{g}))$. So underlying the dg-algebra homomorphism $O^*$ is an ordinary algebra homomorphism $C^\infty(\mathbb{R}) \to C^\infty(\Omega^1(X,\mathfrak{g}))$. By duality, this is equivalently simply a single element

   $$
     O := O^*(id) \in C^\infty(\Omega^1(X,\mathfrak{g}))
     \,,
   $$  

   namely the image of the identity function. 

1. This morphism of algebras found this way still needs to respect the differentials in order to qualify as a homomorphism of dg-algebras. Since the differential of $C^\infty(\mathbb{R})$ vanishes, this gives the condition

   $$
     \begin{aligned}  
       d_{BRST} O & :=
       d_{BRST} O^*(id)
       \\
       & = O^*(d_{C^\infty(\mathbb{R})} id)
       \\
       & = O^*(0)
       \\
       & = 0
     \end{aligned}
     \,.
   $$

In conclusion, this shows that the observables in the BRST complex are precisely the BRST-closed elements in degree 0. These are precisely those functions on the space of field configurations which are invariant under the gauge transformations of the fields.

## Related concepts

The BRST complex described a homotopical [[quotient]] of a space by an infinitesimal [[action]]. Combined with a homotopical intersection, it is part of the [[BRST-BV complex]].

* [[gauge transformation]], [[higher gauge transformation]]

* [[ghost field]], [[ghost-of-ghost field]]

* [[antifield]], [[antighost field]]

* [[local BRST complex]]

* [[equivariant de Rham cohomology]]



[[!include gauge field - table]]


## References

The idea of "ghost" fields was introduced in 

* [[Richard Feynman]], _Quantum theory of gravitation_ In: Acta physica polonica. vol 24, 1963, S. 697 

and expanded on in

* [[Richard Feynman]] in [[John Wheeler]], Klauder (eds.), _Magic without Magic_, Wheeler-Festschrift (1972)

The BRST formalism originates around

* [[Carlo Becchi]], A. Rouet, [[Raymond Stora]], (1976). Renormalization of gauge theories. Ann. Phys. 98: 287,

see also the references at _[[BRST]]_.


The canonical textbook reference on the BRST complex is (chapter 8 of) 

* [[Marc Henneaux]], [[Claudio Teitelboim]], _[[Quantization of Gauge Systems]]_

Discussion with more emphasis on the applications to quantum field theory of interest is in lecture 3 of 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Dynamics of Quantum Field Theory_ in vol II, starting page 1119, of [[Pierre Deligne]], [[Pavel Etingof]], [[Dan Freed]], L. Jeffrey,  [[David Kazhdan]], [[John Morgan]], D.R. Morrison and [[Edward Witten]], eds.  _[[Quantum Fields and Strings]], A course for mathematicians_, 2 vols. Amer. Math. Soc. Providence 1999. 

The [[perturbative quantum field theory|perturbative quantization]] of [[gauge theories]] ([[Yang-Mills theory]]) in [[causal perturbation theory]]/[[perturbative AQFT]] is discussed (for trivial [[principal bundles]] and restricted to [[gauge invariant observables]]) via [[BRST-complex]]/[[BV-formalism]] in

* {#Hollands07} [[Stefan Hollands]], _Renormalized Quantum Yang-Mills Fields in Curved Spacetime_, Rev. Math. Phys.20:1033-1172, 2008 ([arXiv:0705.3340](https://arxiv.org/abs/0705.3340))

* {#FredenhagenRejzner11a} [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], [[Kasia Rejzner]], _Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism in the functional approach to classical field theory_, Commun. Math. Phys. 314(1), 93–127 (2012) ([arXiv:1101.5112](https://arxiv.org/abs/1101.5112))

* {#FredenhagenRejzner11b} [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], [[Kasia Rejzner]], _Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism in perturbative algebraic quantum field theory_, Commun. Math. Phys. 317(3), 697–725 (2012) ([arXiv:1110.5232](https://arxiv.org/abs/1110.5232))

* {#Rejzner13} [[Katarzyna Rejzner]], _Remarks on local symmetry invariance in perturbative algebraic quantum field theory_ ([arXiv:1301.7037](https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.7037))

* {#Rejzner13} [[Katarzyna Rejzner]], _Remarks on local symmetry invariance in perturbative algebraic quantum field theory_ ([arXiv:1301.7037](https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.7037))


and surveyed in

* {#Rejzner16} [[Kasia Rejzner]], section 7 of _Perturbative algebraic quantum field theory_ Springer 2016


Discussion of the BRST complex of the [[bosonic string]]/for [[2d CFT]] includes

* [[Graeme Segal]], p.114 and following of _The definition of conformal field theory_ , preprint, 1988; also in [[Ulrike Tillmann]] (ed.) _Topology, geometry and quantum field theory_ , London Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser., Vol. 308. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2004) 421-577. ([pdf](https://people.maths.ox.ac.uk/segalg/0521540496txt.pdf)) 


Discussion of the BRST complex for the [[superstring]] (hence with the corresponding [[Lie algebroid]] being actually a [[super Lie algebroid]]) is for instance in 

* [[José Figueroa-O'Farrill]], Takashi Kimura, _The BRST cohomology of the NSR string: vanishing and ``no-ghost'' theorems_, Comm. Math. Phys.
Volume 124, Number 1 (1989), 105-132. ([Euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104179078))

* [[Alexander Belopolsky]], _De Rham Cohomology of the Supermanifolds and Superstring BRST Cohomology_, Phys.Lett. B403 (1997) 47-50 ([arXiv:hep-th/9609220](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9609220))

The perspective on the BRST complex as a formal dual to a space in [[dg-geometry]] is relatively clearly stated in section 2 of

* [[Kevin Costello]], _Renormalisation and the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/0706.1533)).

For more along these lines see [[BV-BRST formalism]].

[[!redirects BRST complexes]]