
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Algebraic Qunantum Field Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include AQFT and operator algebra contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

_Quantum electrodynamics_ ("QED") is the [[quantum field theory]] of [[electromagnetism]]: it describes the [[quantum theory]] of [[photons]] and [[electrons]].


## Related concepts

* [[quantum field theory]]

  * [[scalar field]]

  * [[gauge theory]]

    * **QED**

    * [[QCD]]


## References

### Original articles

The term "quantum electrodynamics" is due to 

* [[Paul Dirac]], _The quantum theory of emission and absorption of radiation_, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 114, 243, 1927 ([spire](http://inspirehep.net/record/42586?ln=en), [pdf](http://wwwhome.lorentz.leidenuniv.nl/~boyarsky/media/Proc.R.Soc.Lond.-1927-Dirac-243-65.pdf))

This left some issues with the quantization of the rational field. These were addressed, and the [[causal propagator]] for the [[electromagnetic field]] was first found in 

* [[Pascual Jordan]], [[Wolfgang Pauli]], _Zur Quantenelektrodynamik ladungsfreier Felder_, Zeitschrift für Physik 47, 151 (1928)

For more on the history see

* [[Rudolf Haag]], _Early papers on quantum field theory (1992-1930)_ ([pdf](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/bfm%3A978-3-642-70078-1%2F1%2F1.pdf))

and ([Scharf 95, section 0.0](#Scharf95)).

### Texbooks

A decent textbook discussion of the standard lore is in 

* {#Zeidler} [[Eberhard Zeidler]], _Quantum field theory II: Quantum electrodynamics --  A bridge between mathematicians and physicists_, Springer (2009)
  
Mathematically rigorous discussion in [[causal perturbation theory]] is in

* {#Scharf95} [[Günter Scharf]], _[[Finite Quantum Electrodynamics -- The Causal Approach]]_, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1995, 2nd edition

A construction of QED in the context of [[locally covariant perturbative quantum field theory|pertubative AQFT]] is discussed in 

* [[Michael Dütsch]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], _A local (perturbative) construction of observables in gauge theores: the example of QED_ , Commun. Math. Phys. 203 (1999), no.1, 71-105,  ([arXiv:hep-th/9807078](http://xxx.uni-augsburg.de/abs/hep-th/9807078)). 

and in the further generality of non-abelian [[Yang-Mills theory]] in

* {#Hollands07} [[Stefan Hollands]], _Renormalized Quantum Yang-Mills Fields in Curved Spacetime_, Rev. Math. Phys. 20:1033-1172, 2008 ([arXiv:0705.3340](https://arxiv.org/abs/0705.3340))

Discussion of the [[adiabatic limit]] (dealing with [[infrared divergences]]) is in

* {#Duch17} [[Paweł Duch]], _Massless fields and adiabatic limit in quantum field theory_ ([arXiv:1709.09907](https://arxiv.org/abs/1709.09907))

Comparison to [[experiment]] is reviewed in

* _Tests of QED_ ([pdf](http://edu.itp.phys.ethz.ch/hs10/ppp1/PPP1_6.pdf))




[[!redirects quantum electrodynamics]]
[[!redirects quantum electro dynamics]]
[[!redirects QED]]
