[[algebraic number|Algebraic number]] is a root of a polynomial equation with [[integer]] coefficients (or, equivalently with rational coeffients). An algebraic integer is a root of a [[monic polynomial]] with integer coefficients. Given a field $k$ a (algebraic) __number field__ $K = k[P]$ over $k$ is the minimal field containing all the roots of a given polynomial $P$ with coefficients in $k$. Usually one considers algebraic number fields over rational numbers. 

Algebraic number theory studies algebraic numbers, number fields and related algebraic structures. 

The main direction in algebraic number theory is the class field theory which roughly studies finite abelian extensions of number fields. The one dimensional class field theory stems from the ideas of Kronecker and soon Weber, and results of Hilbert soon after them. Main results of the theory belong to the first half of the 20th century (Hilbert, Artin, Tate, Hasse...) and are quite different for the [[local field]] from the [[global field]] case. Generalizations for higher dimensional fields came later under now active higher class field theory, which is usually formulated in terms of algebraic K-theory and is closely related to deep questions of algebraic geometry (Tate, Kato, Saito etc.). 

* A. Fröhlich, J. W. S. Cassels (editors), _Algebraic number theory_, Acad. Press 1967, with many reprints; Fröhlich, Cassels, Birch, Atiyah, Wall, Gruenberg, Serre, Tate, Heilbronn, Rouqette, Kneser, Hasse, Swinerton-Dyer, Hoechsmann, systematic lecture notes from the instructional conference at Univ. of Sussex, Brighton, Sep. 1-17, 1965.

* Albrecht Fröhlich, Martin J. Taylor, _Algebraic number theory_, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics 27, 1993

The following survey of Connes-Marcolli work has an accessible quick introduction to algebraic number theory

* P. Almeida, _Noncommutative geometry and arithmetics_, Russian Journal of Mathematical Physics 16, No. 3, 2009, pp. 350–362, [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1134/S1061920809030030), see also nLab:arithmetic and noncommutative geometry


* Alexander Schmidt, _Higher dimensional class field theory from a topological point of view_, [page](http://www.mathi.uni-heidelberg.de/~schmidt/papers/schmidt21-en.html)
  



