__Class field theory__ studies finite abelian extensions of number fields. The basic (one dimensional) class field theory stems from the ideas of Kronecker and Weber, and results of Hilbert soon after them. Main results of the theory belong to the first half of the 20th century (Hilbert, Artin, Tate, Hasse...) and are quite different for the [[local field]] from the [[global field]] case. One of the basic objects the class group, is related to the [[Picard group]] in algebraic geometry. 
Generalizations for higher dimensional fields came later under now active higher class field theory, which is usually formulated in terms of algebraic K-theory and is closely related to deep questions of algebraic geometry (Tate, Kato, Saito etc.).

Given an algebraic [[number field]] $k$ one defines a (congruence divisor) class field group $A/H$ in $k$; according to Weber

> An algebraic extension $K/k$ is called a __class field__ to $A/H$, if exactly those prime divisors in $k$ of first degree which belong to the principal class $H$ split completely in $K$

Some of the basic results of the class field theory are the Artin reciprocity theorem, existence theorem, uniqueness theorem, ordering theorem, Weber isomorphy theorem and the decomposition law of class field theory. 

* A. Fröhlich, J. W. S. Cassels (editors), _Algebraic number theory_, Acad. Press 1967, with many reprints; Fröhlich, Cassels, Birch, Atiyah, Wall, Gruenberg, Serre, Tate, Heilbronn, Rouqette, Kneser, Hasse, Swinerton-Dyer, Hoechsmann, systematic lecture notes from the instructional conference at Univ. of Sussex, Brighton, Sep. 1-17, 1965.

* Albrecht Fröhlich, Martin J. Taylor, _Algebraic number theory_, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics 27, 1993

The following survey of Connes-Marcolli work has a quick introduction to algebraic number theory including basic notions of CFT

* P. Almeida, _Noncommutative geometry and arithmetics_, Russian Journal of Mathematical Physics 16, No. 3, 2009, pp. 350–362, [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1134/S1061920809030030), see also nLab:arithmetic and noncommutative geometry

* Alexander Schmidt, _Higher dimensional class field theory from a topological point of view_, [page](http://www.mathi.uni-heidelberg.de/~schmidt/papers/schmidt21-en.html)
  
