
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Quantum field theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functorial quantum field theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--


This entry collects linked keywords for the book

* [[Pierre Deligne]], [[Pavel Etingof]], [[Dan Freed]], L. Jeffrey, 
[[David Kazhdan]], [[John Morgan]], D.R. Morrison and [[Edward Witten]], eds.  

  _Quantum Fields and Strings, A course for mathematicians_, 2 vols. Amer. Math. Soc. Providence 1999. ([web version](http://www.math.ias.edu/qft))

on [[quantum field theory]] and [[string theory]].

While advertized as "A course for mathematicians", it is not. But it is much better than the average physics text.

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Volume I

### Part 1: Classical fields and Supersymmetry

* [[supersymmetry]]

### Part 2: Formal Aspects of QFT

## Volume II


### Part 3: Conformal field theory and strings

#### Lectures on Conformal Field Theory

* [[CFT]]

#### Perturbative String Theory

##### Lecture 1. Point varticles and strings

##### Lecture 2. Spectrum of the free bosonic string

##### Lecture 3. String amplitudes and moduli space of curves

##### Lecture 4. Fadeev-Popov Ghost -- BRST Quantization

##### Lecture 5. Moduli dependence of determinants and Green functions

##### Lecture 6. Strings on general manifolds

* [[Killing spinor]]

##### Lecture 7. Free superstrings

##### Lecture 8. Heterotic strings

* [[heterotic string theory]]

##### Lecture 9. Superstring perturbation theory

##### Lecture 10. Supersymmetry and supergravity

* [[supersymmetry]]

* [[supergravity]]



#### Super Space Description of Super Gravity

* [[supergravity]]

#### Notes on 2d Conformal Field Theory and String Theory

##### Chpater 0. Introduction

* [[vertex operator algebra]]

* [[D-module]]


##### Chapter 1. Chiral algebra

* [[chiral algebra]]

* [[conformal block]]

* [[correlation function]]

##### Chapter 2. CFT data

* [[CFT]]

##### Chapter 3. Examples

* [[Kac-Moody algebra]]

* [[dilaton]]

* [[bc-system]]

##### Chapter 4. BRST  and string amplitudes

* [[BRST complex]]

##### Chapter 5. Further construcitons 

* [[Ran space]]

##### Chapter 6. The free bosonic theory

* [[canonical line bundle]]

#### Kaluza-Klein Compactifications, Supersymmetry, and Calabi Yau Spaces

##### Lecture 1. Compactifications to dimension four

* [[Kaluza-Klein mechanism]]

##### Lecture 2. Supersymmetry and Calabi-Yau manifolds

* [[supersymmetry and Calabi-Yau manifolds]]


### Part 4: Dynamicl Aspects of QFT

#### Dynamics of Quantum Field Theory

#### Dynamics of $N = 1$ Supersymmetric Field Theories in Four Dimensions

category: reference