
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Gravity
+--{: .hide}
[[!include gravity contents]]
=--
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Super-Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include supergeometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--





#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

This page reviews some of the relation between the existence of [[supersymmetry|supersymmetries]] in a [[spacetime]] [[quantum field theory]] which arises as the [[effective quantum field theory]] of some [[string]] [[2d SCFT]], the special geometry of that spacetime (such as [[Calabi-Yau manifold]] structure) as well as increaded [[worldsheet]] supersymmetry of the [[superstring]].

### Target space perspective

A solution to the bosonic [[Einstein equations]] of ordinary [[gravity]] -- some [[Riemannian manifold]] -- has a _global symmetry_ if it has a [[Killing vector]].

Accordingly, a configuration that solves the [[supergravity]] [[Euler-Lagrange equations]] is a _[[global supersymmetry]]_ if it has a [[Killing spinor]]: a [[covariantly constant spinor]].

(Here the notion of [[covariant derivative]] includes the usual [[Levi-Civita connection]], but also in general [[torsion]] components and contributions from other [[background gauge fields]] such as a [[Kalb-Ramond field]] and the [[RR-field]]s in [[type II string theory|type II supergravity]] or [[heterotic string theory|heterotic supergravity]].)

Of particular interest to phenomenologists around the turn of the millenium (but maybe less so today with new experimental evidence) has been in [[KK-compactification]] solutions of [[spacetime]] manifolds of the form $M^4 \times Y^6$ for $M^4$ the locally observed [[Minkowski spacetime]] (that plays a role as the background for all available particle accelerator experiments) and a small [[closed manifold|closed]] 6-dimensional [[Riemannian manifold]] $Y^6$. 

In the absence of further fields besides gravity, the condition that such a configuration has precisely one [[Killing spinor]] and hence precisely one [[global supersymmetry]] turns out to tbe precisely that $Y^6$ is a [[Calabi-Yau manifold]]. One such remaining global supersymmetry in the lowe energy [[effective field theory]] in 4-dimensions is or was believed to be of relevance in [[phenomenology]], see for instance the supersymmetric _[[MSSM]]_ extension of the [[standard model of particle physics]]. This is where all the interest into these Calaboi-Yau manifolds in [[string theory]] comes from. (Notice though that nothing in the theory itself demands such a compactification. It is only the phenomenological assumption of the factorized spacetime compactification together with $N = 1$ supersymmetry that does so).

More generally, in the presence of other [[background gauge fields]], the Calabi-Yau condition here is deformed. One also speaks of [[generalized Calabi-Yau space]]s. (For instance ([GMPT05](#GMPT))).

Alternatively, if one starts the [[KK-compactification]] not from 10-dimensional [[string theory]] but from [[11-dimensional supergravity]]/[[M-theory]], then the condition for the [[KK-compactification]] to preserved precisely one global supersymmetry is that it be on a [[G2-manifold]]. For more on this see at _[[M-theory on G2-manifolds]]_.

### Worldvolume perspective
 {#WorldvolumePerspective}

On the other hand, the enhanced [[supersymmetry]] of [[target space]] is also reflected in enhanced supersymmetry on the [[worldsheet]] of the string. For instance for the [[heterotic string]] whose worlsheet [[2d SCFT]] apriori has $N=(1,0)$ supersymmetry, the target space theory has $N=1$ supersymmetry precisely if the worldsheet theory's supersymmetry enhanced to $N=(2,0)$. ([BDFF 88](#BDFF88)). For more on this see at _[[2d (2,0)-superconformal QFT]]_.

Similar comments apply to [[type II superstring theory]], where $N=1$ target space supersymmetry enhanced the worldheet symmetry from $N=(1,1)$ to $N=(2,2)$. This is reflected notably in the [[mirror symmetry]] of the targt Calabi-Yau manifolds.

## Related concepts

* [[supergravity]], [[supersymmetry]]

* [[Kaluza-Klein mechanism]]

* [[spontaneously broken symmetry]]

* [string theory FAQ -- What does it mean to say that string theory has a "landscape" of solutions?](string%20theory%20FAQ#WhatDoesItMeanToSayStringTheoryHasALandscapeOfSolutions)

## References

Original references include

* Candelas, Horowitz, [[Andrew Strominger]], and [[Edward Witten]], _Vacuum Configurations for Superstrings_ , Nucl. Phys. B 258 (1985), p. 46. 

* {#BDFF88} [[Tom Banks]], [[Lance Dixon]], [[Dan Friedan]], [[Emil Martinec]], _Phenomenology and Conformal Field Theory or Can String Theory Predict the Weak Mixing Angle?_, Nucl. Phys. B299 (1988) 613.  ([pdf](http://www.slac.stanford.edu/cgi-wrap/getdoc/slac-pub-4377.pdf))

* [[Jacques Distler]], [[Brian Greene]], _Aspects Of $(2,0)$ String Compactifications_, Nucl. Phys. B304 (1988) 

* [[Andrew Strominger]], _Special Geometry_, Comm. Math. Phys. 133 (1990) 163.

* P. Candelas and X. De la Ossa, _Moduli Space of Calabi-Yau Manifolds_, Nucl. Phys. B355 (1991) 455.

* [[Edward Witten]], _Phases of N=2 Theories in Two Dimensions_, Nucl. Phys. B403 (1993) 159 ([arXiv:hep-th/9301042](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9301042))

and chapters 12 - 16 of

* [[Michael Green]], [[John Schwarz]], [[Edward Witten]], _Superstring Theory_ , Vol. 2, Cambridge University Press, (1987) 

A canonical textbook reference for the role of Calabi-Yau manifolds in compactifications of 10-dimensional [[supergravity]] is 

* [[Andrew Strominger]] (notes by [[John Morgan]]), _Kaluza-Klein compactifications, Supersymmetry and Calabi-Yau spaces_ , volume II, starting on page 1091 in

  [[Pierre Deligne]], [[Pavel Etingof]], [[Dan Freed]], L. Jeffrey, 
[[David Kazhdan]],  [[John Morgan]], D.R. Morrison and [[Edward Witten]], eds.  , _[[Quantum Fields and Strings]], A course for mathematicians_, 2 vols. Amer. Math. Soc. Providence 1999. ([web version](http://www.math.ias.edu/qft))

Discussion of generalized Calabi-Yau backgrounds is for instance in 

* Mariana Graña, Ruben Minasian, Michela Petrini, Alessandro Tomasiello, _Generalized structures of $N=1$ vacua_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0505212](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0505212))
  {#GMPT}





[[!redirects supergravity and Calabi-Yau manifolds]]

[[!redirects Calabi-Yau manifolds and supersymmetry]]
[[!redirects Calabi-Yau manifolds and supersymmetry]]