
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valuation_%28algebra%29) says very succinctly

> A **valuation** is a [[function]] on a [[field]] that provides a measure of size or multiplicity of elements of the field. They generalize to commutative [[algebra]] the notion of size inherent in consideration of the degree of a pole or multiplicity of a zero in [[complex analysis]], the degree of divisibility of a number by a prime number in number theory, and the geometrical concept of contact between two algebraic or analytic varieties in algebraic geometry.

Sometimes one also discusses *exponential* (or *multiplicative*) *valuations* (also called valuation functions, and viewed as generalized [[absolute values]]) which look more like norms, and their equivalence classes, [[place]]s. See at _[[absolute value]]_ for more on this common sense.


See also [[discrete valuation]] and [[valuation ring]].



## Definition

Given a [[total order|totally ordered]] [[abelian group]] $G$, a $G$-valued __valuation__ $v$ on a (commutative) [[field]] $K$ is a (typically required to be surjective) [[function]] $v:K\to G\cup \infty$ such that $v(K^\times)\subset G$ and 

* $v$ defines the [[homomorphism]] of [[groups]] $v|_K : K^\times\to G$ where $K^\times$ is the [[multiplicative group]] of $K$

* $v(0) = \infty$

* $v(x+y) \geq min\{ v(x),v(y)\}$

with usual conventions for $\infty$. Field equipped with a valuation is a __valued field__. 

If the abelian group is the group of [[integers]] $\mathbf{Z}$ then we talk about [[discrete valuation]]s.


## Properties

In [[algebraic geometry]] there are very important theorems due to Chevalley, [[valuative criterion of properness]] and [[valuative criterion of separatedness]].

## Related concepts

[[!include analytic geometry ingredients -- table]]

## Literature 

* {#BoschGuntzerRemmert84} S. Bosch, U. Güntzer, [[Reinhold Remmert]], _[[Non-Archimedean Analysis]] -- A systematic approach to rigid analytic geometry_, 1984 ([pdf](http://math.arizona.edu/~cais/scans/BGR-Non_Archimedean_Analysis.pdf))


* wikipedia [valuation (algebra)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valuation_%28algebra%29)
* A. Fröhlich, J. W. S. Cassels (editors), _Algebraic number theory_, Acad. Press 1967, with many reprints; Fröhlich, Cassels, Birch, Atiyah, Wall, Gruenberg, Serre, Tate, Heilbronn, Rouqette, Kneser, Hasse, Swinerton-Dyer, Hoechsmann, systematic lecture notes from the instructional conference at Univ. of Sussex, Brighton, Sep. 1-17, 1965. (Especially chapters 1,2)
* Serge Lang, _Algebraic number theory_, GTM __110__, Springer 1970, 2000
* [[Ehud Hrushovski]], [[David Kazhdan]], _The value ring of geometric motivic integration and the Iwahori Hecke algebra of $SL 2$_, [math.LO/0609115](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0609115); _Integration in valued fields_, in Algebraic geometry and number theory, 261–405, Progress. Math. __253__, Birkhäuser Boston, [pdf](http://math.huji.ac.il/~ehud/papers/intv-060428.pdf)
* A H Lightstone, Abraham Robinson, _Nonarchimedean fields and asymptotic expansions_, North-Holland Publ. 1976

check out ([Scholze 11, def. 22, remark 2.3](perfectoid%20space#Scholze11))

[[!redirects valuations]]
[[!redirects valued field]]
[[!redirects valued fields]]