#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Idea 

Given a ring, you can construct the Witt ring from it. For [[perfect field]]s of positive [[characteristic]], this ring $W(k)$ has some very nice properties. It is a complete [[discrete valuation ring]] with [[residue field]] $k$ and fraction field of characteristic $0$. 


## Construction

Suppose $A$ is a [[commutative ring]] with identity. We will construct the ring of generalized Witt vectors.  First, let $x_1, x_2, \ldots $ be a collection of [[indeterminate]]s. We can define an infinite collection of [[polynomial]]s in $\mathbb{Z}[x_1, x_2, \ldots ]$ using the following formulas:

$w_1(X)=x_1$

$w_2(X)=x_1^2+2x_2$

$w_3(X)=x_1^3+3x_3$

$w_4(X)=x_1^4+2x_2^2+4x_4$

and in general $\displaystyle w_n(X)=\sum_{d|n} dx_n^{n/d}$.

Now let $\phi(z_1, z_2)\in\mathbb{Z}[z_1, z_2]$. This just an arbitrary two variable polynomial with coefficients in $\mathbb{Z}$. 

We can define new polynomials $\Phi_i(x_1, \ldots x_i, y_1, \ldots y_i)$ such that the following condition is met $\phi(w_n(x_1, \ldots ,x_n), w_n(y_1, \ldots , y_n))=w_n(\Phi_1(x_1, y_1), \ldots , \Phi_n(x_1, \ldots x_n, y_1, \ldots , y_n))$.

In short we'll notate this $\phi(w_n(X),w_n(Y))=w_n(\Phi(X,Y))$. The first thing we need to do is make sure that such polynomials exist. Now it isn't hard to check that the $x_i$ can be written as a $\mathbb{Q}$-linear combination of the $w_n$ just by some linear algebra.

$x_1=w_1$, and $x_2=\frac{1}{2}w_2+\frac{1}{2}w_1^2$, etc. so we can plug these in to get the existence of such polynomials with coefficients in $\mathbb{Q}$. It is a fairly tedious lemma to prove that the coefficients $\Phi_i$ are actually in $\mathbb{Z}$, so we won't detract from the construction right now to prove it.

Define yet another set of polynomials $\Sigma_i$, $\Pi_i$ and $\iota_i$ by the following properties:

$w_n(\Sigma)=w_n(X)+w_n(Y)$, $w_n(\Pi)=w_n(X)w_n(Y)$ and $w_n(\iota)=-w_n(X)$.

We now can construct $W(A)$, the ring of generalized Witt vectors over $A$. Define $W(A)$ to be the set of all infinite sequences $(a_1, a_2, \ldots)$ with entries in $A$. Then we define addition and multiplication by $(a_1, a_2, \ldots, )+(b_1, b_2, \ldots)=(\Sigma_1(a_1,b_1), \Sigma_2(a_1,a_2,b_1,b_2), \ldots)$ and $(a_1, a_2, \ldots )\cdot (b_1, b_2, \ldots )=(\Pi_1(a_1,b_1), \Pi_2(a_1,a_2,b_1,b_2), \ldots )$.


### Proof that W(A) is a ring

There is a nice trick to prove that $W(A)$ is a ring when $A$ is a $\mathbb{Q}$-algebra. Just define $\psi: W(A)\to A^\mathbb{N}$ by $(a_1, a_2, \ldots) \mapsto (w_1(a), w_2(a), \ldots)$. This is a [[bijection]] and the addition and multiplication is taken to component-wise addition and multiplication, so since this is the standard ring structure we know $W(A)$ is a ring. Also, $w(0,0,\ldots)=(0,0,\ldots)$, so $(0,0,\ldots)$ is the additive identity, $W(1,0,0,\ldots)=(1,1,1,\ldots)$ which shows $(1,0,0,\ldots)$ is the multiplicative identity, and $w(\iota_1(a), \iota_2(a), \ldots)=(-a_1, -a_2, \ldots)$, so we see $(\iota_1(a), \iota_2(a), \ldots)$ is the additive inverse.

We can actually get this idea to work for any characteristic $0$ ring by considering the embedding $A\to A\otimes\mathbb{Q}$. We have an induced injective map $W(A)\to W(A\otimes\mathbb{Q})$. The addition and multiplication is defined by polynomials over $\mathbb{Z}$, so these operations are preserved upon tensoring with $\mathbb{Q}$. We just proved above that $W(A\otimes\mathbb{Q})$ is a ring, so since $(0,0,\ldots)\mapsto (0,0,\ldots)$ and $(1,0,0,\ldots)\mapsto (1,0,0,\ldots)$ and the map preserves inverses we get that the image of the embedding $W(A)\to W(A\otimes \mathbb{Q})$ is a subring and hence $W(A)$ is a ring.

Lastly, we need to prove this for positive [[characteristic]] rings. Choose a characteristic $0$ ring that surjects onto $A$, say $B\to A$. Then since the induced map again preserves everything and $W(B)\to W(A)$ is [[surjective]], the image is a ring and hence $W(A)$ is a ring. 

## Functorial Definition

We were really implicitly using is that $W:\mathbf{Ring}\to\mathbf{Ring}$ is a [[functor]]. It takes a ring $A$ and gives a new ring $W(A)$. If $\phi: A\to B$ is a ring map, then $W(\phi): W(A)\to W(B)$ by $(a_1, a_2, \ldots)\mapsto (\phi(a_1), \phi(a_2), \ldots)$ is still a ring map. We also have $w_n:W(A)\to A$ by $a\mapsto w_n(a)$ are ring maps for all $n$.

It is cleaner to define the ring of Witt vectors as the unique functor $W$ that satisfies these three properties. From a functorial point of view it turns out that $W$ is [[representable]]. The representing ring via the ring axioms gives a [[Hopf algebra]] structure, and hence we get an [[affine]] [[group scheme]] out of it.

## P-Typical Witt Vectors

Now suppose that $k$ is a perfect field of characteristic $p\neq 0$. It is very standard to talk about the "Witt vectors" in this situation and mean the $p$-typical Witt vectors. When being careful, people write $W_{p^\infty}(k)$, but most of the time all that is written is $W(k)$.

The construction is the same, except in the first step. Instead of forming $w_j(X)$ for all $j$, you only take $j$ that are powers of $p$. It is common to then shift notation to match with the old notation. Technically an element of this ring is of the form $(a_{p^0}, a_{p^1}, \ldots )$, but it is standard to write $(a_0, a_1, \ldots )$ instead.

### Examples

* $W_{p^\infty}(\mathbb{F}_p)\simeq \mathbb{Z}_p$ the $p$-adic integers.

* $W_{p^\infty}(\mathbb{F}_{p^n})$ is the unique [[unramified extension]] of $\mathbb{Z}_p$ of degree $n$.

## Operations on the Witt vectors

We assume we're in the case of $p$-typical Witt vectors. Since the ring operations of the first $n$ components only involve the first $n$ components, the truncated Witt vectors $W_n(A)$ are still rings and the projection map $W(A)\to W_n(A)$ is a [[ring homomorphism]].

We have a shift operator $V: W_n(A)\to W_{n+1}(A)$ that is given on elements by $(a_0, \ldots, a_{n-1})\mapsto (0, a_0, \ldots, a_{n-1})$. Note that this map is additive, but is not a ring map. We also have the restriction map $R: W_{n+1}(A)\to W_n(A)$ given by $(a_0, \ldots, a_n)\mapsto (a_0, \ldots, a_{n-1})$. 

Lastly, we have the Frobenius endomorphism $F: W_n(A)\to W_n(A)$ given by $(a_0, \ldots , a_{n-1})\mapsto (a_0^p, \ldots, a_{n-1}^p)$. This is also a ring map, but only because of our necessary assumption that $A$ is of characteristic $p$.

Just by brute force checking on elements we see a few relations between these operations, namely that $V(x)y=V(x F(R(y)))$ and $RVF=FRV=RFV=p$ the multiplication by $p$ map.

## Ring Properties

Suppose that $k$ is a perfect field of positive characteristic $p$, then $W(k)$ is a discrete valuation ring with maximal ideal generated by $p$. From the above we see that $pW(k)=(0, a_0^p, a_1^p, \ldots )$. This clearly gives $W(k)/pW(k)\simeq k$. 

Also, $W(k)/p^nW(k)\simeq W_n(k)$. Thus the completion of $W(k)$ with respect to the maximal ideal is just $lim W_n(k)\simeq W(k)$ which shows that $W(k)$ is a complete discrete valuation ring.

## Related Concepts

* [[Witt Cohomology]]

* [[Lambda-ring]]

## References

* Michiel Hazewinkel, Formal Groups and Applications, [projecteuclid](http://projecteuclid.org/DPubS?service=UI&version=1.0&verb=Display&handle=euclid.bams/1183548600)

* Michel [[Demazure, lectures on p-divisible groups]]
 

