#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Definition 

Let $(R, \lt)$ be a dense linear order without endpoints. An order-minimal or **o-minimal structure** on $R$ is a [[structure (model theory)|structure]] $\mathcal{S}$ on $R$ such that 

* The relation $\lt$ belongs to $\mathcal{S}_2$; 

* The elements of $\mathcal{S}_1$ are precisely finite unions of points and intervals in $R$. 

Here an interval can mean a set of the form $I_{a, b} = \{x \in R: a \lt x \lt b\}$, or $I_{\downarrow a} = \{x \in R: x \lt a\}$, or $I_{\uparrow a} = \{x \in R: a \lt x\}$. 

## Commentary 

A structure on a set $R$ can be thought of as the collection $\mathcal{S} = \bigcup_n \mathcal{S}_n$ of sets that are definable with respect to a one-sorted first-order language $L$ with a given interpretation in $R$. Thus $\mathcal{S}_n$ is the collection of subsets of $R^n$ which are defined by $n$-ary predicates in $L$. The definition of o-minimal structure supposes that $L$ contains a relation symbol $\lt$, and that $\lt$ is interpreted in $R$ as a dense linear order without endpoints. 

The o-minimality condition places a sharp restriction on which subsets of $R$ can be defined in the language. Essentially, it means that the only definable subsets of $R$ are those which are definable in terms of constants and the predicates $\lt$ and $=$. 

The archetypal example of an o-minimal structure is that of [[semi-algebraic set]]s defined over $\mathbb{R}$ (which form a structure due to the [[semialgebraic set|Tarski-Seidenberg theorem]]). 

Quite remarkably, quite a lot can be said about the structure of definable sets in an o-minimal structure over $\mathbb{R}$, and this is a very active area of model theory. The notion of o-minimal structure has been proposed as a reasonable candidate for an axiomatic approach to Grothendieck's hoped-for "tame topology" ([_topologie mod&eacute;r&eacute;e_]). 

## References 

* Lou van den Dries, _Tame Topology and O-minimal Structures_, London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes Series 248, Cambridge U. Press 1998. 

* Alexandre Grothendieck, _Esquisse d'un Programme_, section 5. English translation available in Geometric Galois Actions I (edited by L. Schneps and P. Lochak), LMS Lecture Notes Ser. 242, CUP 1997. 
