
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Symplectic geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include symplectic geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# The moment map
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A _moment map_ is a dual incarnation of a [[Hamiltonian action]] of a [[Lie group]] (or [[Lie algebra]]) on a [[symplectic manifold]].

An [[action]] of a [[Lie group]] $G$ on a [[symplectic manifold]] $X$ by ([[Hamiltonian symplectomorphisms|Hamiltonian]]) [[symplectomorphisms]] corresponds [[infinitesimal space|infinitesimally]] to a Lie algebra [[homomorphism]] from the [[Lie algebra]] $\mathfrak{g}$ to the [[Hamiltonian vector fields]] on $X$. If this lifts to a coherent choice of [[Hamiltonians]], hence to a Lie algebra homomorphism $\mathfrak{g} \to (C^\infty(X), \{-,-\})$ to the [[Poisson bracket]], then, by [[dual vector space|dualization]], this is equivalently a [[Poisson manifold]] homomorphism of the form

$$
  \mu : X \to \mathfrak{g}^*
  \,.
$$

This $\mu$ is called the _moment map_ or _momentum map_ of the Hamiltonian action.

The name derives from the special and historically first case of [[angular momentum]] in the [[rigid body dynamics|dynamics of rigid bodies]], see _[Examples - Angular momentum](#AngularMomentum)_ below.


## Definition

The [Preliminaries](#Preliminaries) below review some basics of [[Hamiltonian vector fields]]. The definition of the moment map itself is below in _[Hamiltonian action and the moment map](#HamiltonianActionAndTheMomentMap)_.

### Preliminaries
 {#Preliminaries}

This section briefly reviews the notion of [[Hamiltonian vector fields]] on a [[symplectic manifold]]

The basic setup is the following: Let $(M,\omega)$ be a [[symplectic manifold]] with a [[Hamiltonian action]] of a [[Lie group]] $G$. In particular that means that there is an [[action]] $\nu\colon G \times M \to M$ via [[symplectomorphism]]s (diffeomorphisms $\nu_g$ such that $\nu_g^*(\omega) = \omega$). A vector field $X$ is [[symplectic vector field|symplectic]] if the corresponding flow preserves (again by pullbacks) $\omega$. The symplectic vector fields form a Lie subalgebra $\chi(M,\omega)$ of the Lie algebra of all smooth vector fields $\chi(M)$ on $M$ with respect to the Lie bracket. 

By the [[Cartan homotopy formula]] and closedness $d \omega = 0$

$$
\mathcal{L}_X \omega = d \iota_X \omega
$$

where $\mathcal{L}_X$ denotes the [[Lie derivative]]. Therefore a vector field $X$ is symplectic iff $\iota(X)\omega = d H$ for some function $H\in C^\infty(M)$, usually called Hamiltonian (function) for $X$. Here $X$ is determined by $H$ up to a locally constant function. Such $X = X_H$ is called the __Hamiltonian vector field__ corresponding to $H$.  The Poisson structure on $M$ is the bracket $\{,\}$ on functions may be given by 

$$
\{ f, g\} := [X_f,X_g]
$$

where there is a Lie bracket of vector fields on the right hand side.

For $(M,\omega)$ a connected symplectic manifold,  there is an exact sequence of [[Lie algebras]]

$$
  0 \to \mathbf{R}\to (C^\infty(M), \{-,-\}) \to \chi(M,\omega) \to 0
  \,.
$$

See at _[Hamiltonian vector field -- Relation to Poisson bracket](Hamiltonian+vector+field#RelationToFunctions)_.



### Hamiltonian action and moment map
 {#HamiltonianActionAndTheMomentMap}

Let $(X, \omega)$ be a [[symplectic manifold]] and let $\mathfrak{g}$ be a [[Lie algebra]]. Write $(C^\infty(X), \{-,-\})$ for the [[Poisson bracket]] Lie algebra underlying the corresponding [[Poisson algebra]]. 

+-- {: .num_defn #MomentMap}
###### Definition

A _[[Hamiltonian action]]_ of $\mathfrak{g}$ on $(X, \omega)$ is a [[Lie algebra]] [[homomorphism]]

$$
  \tilde \mu \;\colon\; \mathfrak{g} \longrightarrow (C^\infty(X), \{-,-\})
  \,.
$$

The corresponding function

$$
  \mu \;\colon\; X \longrightarrow \mathfrak{g}^*
$$

to the [[dual vector space]] of $\mathfrak{g}$, defined by

$$
  \mu \;\colon\; x \mapsto \tilde \mu(-)(x)
$$

is the corresponding **moment map**.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark #Notation}
###### Remark

If one writes the evaluation pairing as

$$
  \langle -,-\rangle : \mathfrak{g}^* \otimes \mathfrak{g} \to \mathbb{R}
$$

then the equation characterizing $\mu$ in def. \ref{MomentMap} reads for all $x \in X$ and $v \in \mathfrak{g}$

$$
  \langle \mu(x), v \rangle = \tilde \mu(v)(x)
  \,.
$$

This is the way it is often written in the literature.

Notice that this in turn means that 

$$
  \tilde \mu(v)= \mu^\ast \langle -,v\rangle
  \,.
$$

=--


+-- {: .num_prop #EquivalenceOfLieAndPoissonFormulation}
###### Proposition

The following are equivalent

1. the linear map underlying $\tilde\mu$ in def. \ref{MomentMap} is [[Lie algebra]] [[homomorphism]];

1. its dual $\mu$ is a [[Poisson manifold]] [[homomorphism]] with respect to the [[Lie-Poisson structure]] on $\mathfrak{g}^\ast$.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

This follows by just unwinding the definitions.

In one direction, suppose that $\tilde \mu$ is a Lie homomorphism. Since the [[Lie-Poisson structure]] is fixed on linear functions on $\mathfrak{g}^\ast$, it is sufficient to check that $\mu^\ast$ preserves the Poisson bracket on these. 
Consider hence two Lie algebra elements $v_1, v_2 \in \mathfrak{g}$ regarded as linear functions $\langle -,v_i\rangle$ on $\mathfrak{g}^\ast$. Noticing that on such linear functions the Lie-Poisson structure is given by the Lie bracket we have, using remark \ref{Notation}

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \mu^\ast \{\langle -,v_1\rangle, \langle -,v_2\rangle\}
    &=
    \mu^\ast \langle-,[v_1,v_2]\rangle
    \\
    & = \tilde \mu([v_1,v_2])
    \\
    & = \{\tilde\mu(v_1), \tilde\mu(v_2)\}
    \\
    & = 
   \left\{  
      \mu^\ast \langle -,v_1\rangle, \mu^\ast \langle -,v_2\rangle
   \right\}
  \end{aligned}
$$

and hence $\mu^\ast$ preserves the Poisson brackets.

Conversely, suppose that $\mu$ is a Poisson homomorphism. Then

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \tilde\mu [v_1,v_2]
    &=
    \mu^\ast \langle -, [v_1,v_2]\rangle
    \\
    & =
    \mu^\ast \{\langle -,v_1\rangle, \langle -,v_2\rangle\}
    \\
    & =
    \left\{
      \mu^\ast \langle -, v_1\rangle,
      \mu^\ast \langle -, v_2\rangle
    \right\}
    \\
    & =
    \left\{
      \tilde\mu(v_1), \tilde\mu(v_2)
    \right\}
  \end{aligned}
$$

and so $\tilde \mu$ is a Lie homomorphism.

=--

## Examples

### Angular moment
 {#AngularMomentum}

(...)

## Properties

### Relation to conserved quantities

The values of the moment map for each given Lie algebra generator may be regarded as the [[conserved current|conserved currents]] given by a _Hamiltonian [[Noether theorem]]_.

Specifically if $(X,\omega)$ is a [[symplectic manifold]] equipped with a "time evolution" [[Hamiltonian action]] $\mathbb{R} \to \mathfrak{Poisson}(X,\omega)$ given by a [[Hamiltonian]] $H$ and if $\mathfrak{g} \to \mathfrak{Poisson}(X,\omega)$ is some [[Hamiltonian action]] with moment $\Phi(\xi)$ for $\xi \in \mathfrak{g}$ which preserves the Hamiltonian in that the [[Poisson bracket]] vanishes

$$
  \{\Phi^\xi, H\} = 0
$$

then of course also the time evolution of the moments vanishes

$$
  \frac{d}{d t} \Phi^\xi = \{H, \Phi^\xi\} = 0
  \,.
$$

See at _[Noether theorem -- In terms of moment maps/Hamiltonian Noether theorem ](Noether%27s+theorem#HamiltonianNoetherTheorem)_.

### Relation to constrained mechanics
 {#RelationToConstrainedMechanics}

In the context of [[constrained mechanics]] the components of the moment map (as the Lie algebra argument varies) are called [[first class constraints]]. See _[[symplectic reduction]]_ for more.

## Related concepts

The moment map is a crucial ingredient in the construction of Marsden--Weinstein [[symplectic quotients]] and in other variants of symplectic reduction.




## References

### General

* [[Victor Guillemin]], [[Yael Karshon]], [[Viktor Ginzburg]], _Moment Maps, Cobordisms, and Hamiltonian Group Actions_, Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, volume 98

Lecture notes and surveys include

* [[Joel W. Robbin]], _The moment map_, an exposition, [pdf](http://www.math.wisc.edu/~robbin/moment.pdf)

* [[Nicole Berline]], [[Michèle Vergne]], _Hamiltonian manifolds and moment maps_ ([pdf](http://www.math.polytechnique.fr/~berline/cours-Fudan.pdf))

Original articles include

* [[Victor Guillemin]], [[Shlomo Sternberg]], _Geometric asymptotics_, AMS (1977) ([online](http://www.ams.org/online_bks/surv14))

* [[Michael Atiyah]], _Convexity and commuting Hamiltonians_, Bull. London
Math. Soc. __14__ (1982), 1-15.

* [[Michael Atiyah]], [[Raoul Bott]], _The moment map and equivariant cohomology_, Topology, Vol 23, No. 1 (1984) ([pdf](https://www.math.sunysb.edu/~mmovshev/MAT570Spring2008/BOOKS/atiyahbott_moment.pdf))
  {#AtiyahBott84}

Further developments are in

* M. Spera, _On a generalized uncertainty principle, [[coherent state]]s and the moment map_, J. of Geometry and Physics __12__ (1993) 165-182, [MR94m:58097](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=1237511), <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0393-0440(93)90032-A">doi</a>


* Ctirad Klimčík, [[Pavol Ševera]], _[[T-duality]] and the moment map_, IHES/P/96/70, [hep-th/9610198](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9610198); _Poisson-Lie T-duality: open strings and D-branes_, CERN-TH/95-339. Phys.Lett. B376 (1996) 82-89, [hep-th/9512124](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9512124)

* A. Cannas da Silva, [[Alan Weinstein]], _Geometric models for noncommutative algebras_, Berkeley Math. Lec. Notes Series, AMS 1999, ([pdf](http://math.berkeley.edu/%7Ealanw/Models.pdf))

* Friedrich Knop, _Automorphisms of multiplicity free Hamiltonian manifolds_, [arxiv/1002.4256](http://arxiv.org/abs/1002.4256)

* W. Crawley-Boevey, _Geometry of the moment map for representations of
quivers_, Compositio Math. __126__ (2001), no. 3, 257-293.

See also

* wikipedia, _[moment map](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moment_map)_

Moment maps in [[higher geometry]], [[schreiber:Higher geometric prequantum theory]], are discussed in 

* [[Yael Fregier]], [[Chris Rogers]], [[Marco Zambon]], _Homotopy moment maps_ ([arXiv:1304.2051](http://arxiv.org/abs/1304.2051))

### Relation to symplectic reduction

Reviews include for instance



* {#FOF} [[José Figueroa-O’Farrill]], p. 26 of  chapter 2+3 of PhD thesis  ([pdf](http://empg.maths.ed.ac.uk/Activities/BRST/Ch2+3PhD.pdf))
 

### Relation to equivariant cohomology

Relation to [[equivariant cohomology]]:

* [[Michael Atiyah]], [[Raoul Bott]], _The moment map and equivariant cohomology_, Topology vol. 23 No. 1 1984  ([pdf](https://www.math.sunysb.edu/~mmovshev/MAT570Spring2008/BOOKS/atiyahbott_moment.pdf))

### Generalization: group-valued moment maps

* [[Anton Alekseev]], Anton Malkin, [[Eckhard Meinrenken]], _Lie group valued moment maps_, J. Differential Geom. Volume 48, Number 3 (1998), 445-495. [euclid](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.jdg/1214460860), [MR1638045](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=1638045)

* [[Eckhard Meinrenken]], _Lectures on group-valued moment maps and Verlinde formulas_, 35 pages, January 2012, [pdf](http://www.math.toronto.edu/mein/research/NotreLectures.pdf)

The relation between moment maps and [[conserved currents]]/[[Noether's theorem]] is amplied for instance in
 
* {#Fan} Huijun Fan, _Lecture 8, Moment map and symplectic reduction_ ([pdf](http://www.math.pku.edu.cn/teachers/fanhj/courses/symp-8.pdf))
 

[[!redirects moment maps]]

[[!redirects momentum map]]
[[!redirects momentum maps]]

[[!redirects ∞-moment map]]
[[!redirects ∞-moment maps]]

[[!redirects infinity-moment map]]
[[!redirects infinity-moment maps]]

