
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--




#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A _bimodule_ is a [[module]] in two compatible ways over two [[algebras]].

## Definition

Let $V$ be a [[closed monoidal category]]. Recall that for $C$ a category [[enriched category|enriched over]] $V$, a $V$-[[module]] is a $V$-functor $\rho : C \to V$. We think of the objects $\rho(a)$ for $a \in Obj(C)$ as the objects on which $C$ acts, and of $\rho(C(a,b))$ as the action of $C$ on these objects.

In this language a $C$-$D$ _bimodule_ for $V$-categories $C$ and $D$ is a $V$-functor

$$
  C^{op} \otimes D \to V
  \,.
$$

Such a functor is also called a profunctor or [[distributor]].

+--{.query}
Some points are in order. Strictly speaking, the construction of $C^{op}$ from a $V$-category $C$ requires that $V$ be symmetric (or at least braided) monoidal. It's possible to define $C$-$D$ bimodules without recourse to $C^{op}$, but then either that should be spelled out, or one should include a symmetry. (If the former is chosen, then closedness one on side might not be the best choice of assumption, in view of the next remark; a more natural choice might be biclosed monoidal.) 

Second: bimodules are not that much good unless you can compose them; for that one should add some cocompleteness assumptions to $V$ (with $\otimes$ cocontinuous in both arguments; biclosedness would ensure that), and consider smallness assumptions on the objects $C$, $D$, etc. ---Todd. 
=--

## Examples

* Let $V = Set$ and let $C = D$.  Then the hom functor $C(-, -):C^{op} \times C \to Set$ is a bimodule.  Bimodules can be thought of as a kind of generalized hom, giving a set of morphisms (or object of $V$) between an object of $C$ and an object of $D$.

* Let $\hat{C} = Set^{C^{op}}$; the objects of $\hat{C}$ are "generating functions" that assign to each object of $C$ a set.  Every bimodule $f:D^op \times C \to Set$ can be curried to give a Kleisli arrow $\tilde{f}:C \to \hat{D}$.  Composition of these arrows corresponds to convolution of the generating functions. 

  +--{.query}
  [[Todd Trimble|Todd]]: I am not sure what is trying to be said with regard to "convolution". I know about Day convolution, but this is not the same thing. 

  Also, with regard to "Kleisli arrow": I understand the intent, but one should proceed with caution since there is no global monad $C \mapsto \hat{C}$ to which Kleisli would refer. Again there are size issues that need attending to.
  =--

* Let $V = Vect$ and let $C = \mathbf{B}A_1$ and $D = \mathbf{B}A_2$ be two one-object $Vect$-enriched categories, whose endomorphism vector spaces are hence [[algebra]]s. Then a $C$-$D$ bimodule is a vector space $V$ with an action of $A_1$ on the left and and action of $A_2$ on the right.

## Properties

### The 1-category of bimodules and intertwiners

+-- {: .num_defn #1CategoryOfBimodulesAndIntertwiners}
###### Definition 

For $R$ a [[commutative ring]], write $BMod_R$ for the [[category]] whose

* [[objects]] are triples $(A,B,N)$ where $A$ and $B$ are $R$-[[associative algebra|algebras]] and where $N$ is an $A$-$B$-[[bimodule]];

* [[morphisms]] are triples $(f,g, \phi)$ consisting of two algebra [[homomorphisms]] $f \colon A \to A'$ and $B \colon B \to B'$ and an [[intertwiner]] of $A$-$B'$-bimdules $\phi \colon N \cdot g \to f \cdot N'$. This we may depict as a 

  $$
    \array{
      A &\stackrel{N}{\to}& B
      \\
      {}^{\mathllap{f}}\downarrow &\Downarrow_{\phi}& \downarrow^{\mathrlap{g}}
      \\
      A' &\stackrel{N'}{\to}& B'
    }  
    \,.
  $$

=--

+-- {: .num_remark }
###### Remark

As this notation suggests, $BMod_R$ is naturally the vertical category of a [[pseudo double category]] whose horizontal composition is given by tensor product of bimodules. spring

=--


### The 2-category of algebras and bimodules
 {#AsMorphismsInA2Category}

Let $R$ be a [[commutative ring]] and consider bimodules over $R$-algebras.

+-- {: .num_prop #AlgebrasAndBimodules}
###### Proposition

There is a [[2-category]] whose 

* [[objects]] are $R$-[[algebras]];

* [[1-morphisms]] are bimodules;

* [[2-morphisms]] are [[intertwiners]].

The [[composition]] of 1-morphisms is given by the [[tensor product of modules]] over the middle algebra.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

There is a [[2-functor]] from the above 2-category of algebras and bimodules to [[Cat]] which

* sends an $R$-algebra $A$ to its [[category of modules]] $Mod_A$;

* sends a $A_1$-$A_2$-bimodule $N$ to the [[tensor product]] [[functor]]

  $$
    (-)\otimes_{A_1} N
    \;\colon\;
    Mod_{A_1} \to Mod_{A_2}
  $$

* sends an [[intertwiner]] to the evident [[natural transformation]] of the above functors.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

This construction has as its image precisely the [[colimit]]-preserving [[functors]] between [[categories of modules]].

=--

This is the [[Eilenberg-Watts theorem]].

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

In the context of [[higher category theory]]/[[higher algebra]] one may interpret this as says that the [[2-category]] of those [[2-modules]] over the given ring which are equivalent to a [[category of modules]] is that of $R$-algebras, bimodules and intertwiners. See also at _[[2-ring]]_.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The 2-category of algebras and bimodules is an archtypical example for a [[2-category with proarrow equipment]], hence for a [[pseudo double category]] with niche-fillers. Or in the language of [[internal (infinity,1)-category]]-theory: it naturally induces the structure of a [[simplicial object]] in the [[(2,1)-category]] $Cat$ 

$$
  \left(
    \cdots
    \stackrel{\to}{\stackrel{\to}{\to}}
    X_1 
      \stackrel{\overset{\partial_1}{\to}}{\underset{\partial_0}{\to}}
    X_0
  \right)
  \in
  Cat^{\Delta^{op}}
$$

which satisfies the [[Segal conditions]]. Here 

$$
  X_0 =  Alg_R
$$ 

is the category of [[associative algebras]] and [[homomorphisms]] between them, while 

$$
  X_1 = BMod_R
$$ 

is the category of def. \ref{1CategoryOfBimodulesAndIntertwiners}, whose objects are pairs consisting of two algebras $A$ and $B$ and an $A$-$B$ bimodule $N$ between them, and whose morphisms are pairs consisting of two algebra homomorphisms $f \colon A \to A'$ and $g \colon B \to B'$ and an [[intertwiner]] $N \cdot (g) \to (f) \cdot N'$.

=--


### The $(\infty,2)$-category of $\infty$-algebras and $\infty$-bimodules
 {#Infinity2CategoryOfInfinityAlgebrasAndBimodules}

The above has a generalization to _[[(infinity,1)-bimodules]]_. See there for more.

## Related concepts

* [[Hilbert bimodule]]

* [[amplimorphism]]

* [[bibundle]]

* [[(infinity,1)-bimodule]]

* [[2-module]], [[2-ring]]



## References

The 2-category of bimodules in its incarnation as a [[2-category with proarrow equipment]] appears as example 2.3 in 

* [[Michael Shulman]], _Framed bicategories and monoidal fibrations_ ([arXiv:0706.1286](http://arxiv.org/abs/0706.1286))

Bimodules in [[homotopy theory]]/[[higher algebra]] are discussed in section 4.3 of 

* [[Jacob Lurie]], _[[Higher Algebra]]_
 {#Lurie}

For more on that see at _[[(∞,1)-bimodule]]_.

[[!redirects bimodules]]

