
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Quantum field theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functorial quantum field theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

[[Nahm's classification]] of [[superconformal quantum field theories]] predicts the existence of such a theory with $(2,0)$-[[supersymmetry]] in [[dimension]] 6, which is such that it contains a [[self-dual higher gauge theory]] whose field configurations are [[connections on a 2-bundle]] (a [[circle n-bundle with connection|circle 2-bundle with connection]] in the abelian case).

It is expected ([Witten](#Witten07)) that such theories arise as the [[worldvolume]] theories of [[M5-brane]]s and that their compactifications are at the heart of the phenomenon that leads to [[S-duality]] and hence [[geometric Langlands duality]] ([Witten](#Witten09)).

Due to the [[self-dual higher gauge theory|self-duality]] a characterization of these theories by an [[action functional]] is at best subtle, maybe impossible. Therefore more direct descriptions are still under investigation (for instance [SSW11](#SSW11)). A review of recent developments is in ([Moore11](#Moore)).

## Properties

### Holographic dual

Under [[holographic principle|holography]] the 6d $(2,0)$-superconformal QFT is supposed to be dual to [[11-dimensional supergravity|M-theory]] on $AdS_7 \times S^4$.  

This goes back to ([Maldacena, 3.1](#Maldacena)). More details are for instance in ([HEGK](#HEGK)).


## References

### General

* [[Edward Witten]], _Conformal Field Theory In Four And Six Dimensions_ in [[Ulrike Tillmann]] (ed.) _Topology, geometry and quantum field theory_ LMS Lecture Note Series (2004) ([arXiv:0712.0157](http://arxiv.org/abs/0712.0157))
 {#Witten07}

* [[Edward Witten]], _Geometric Langlands From Six Dimensions_ ([arXiv:0905.2720](http://arxiv.org/abs/0905.2720))
 {#Witten09}.

* [[Greg Moore]], _On the role of six‐dimensional $(2,0)$-theories in recent developments in
Physical Mathematics_ , talk at Strings2011 ([pdf slides](http://www-conference.slu.se/strings2011/presentations/3%20Wednesday/930_Moore.pdf))
  {#Moore}

* [[Henning Samtleben]], Ergin Sezgin, Robert Wimmer, _(1,0) superconformal models in six dimensions_ ([arXiv:1108.4060](http://arxiv.org/abs/1108.4060))
 {#SSW11}

### On the holographic dual 
 {#ReferencesOnTheHolographicDual}

* [[Juan Maldacena]], _The Large N limit of superconformal field theories and supergravity_, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2:231, 1998, [hep-th/9711200](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9711200); _Wilson loops in Large N field theories_, Phys. Rev. Lett. __80__ (1998) 4859, [hep-th/9803002](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9803002)
 {#Maldacena}


* [[Eric D'Hoker]], John Estes, Michael Gutperle, Darya Krym, 

  _Exact Half-BPS Flux Solutions in M-theory I
Local Solutions_ ([arXiv:0806.0605](http://arxiv.org/abs/0806.0605))

  _Exact Half-BPS Flux Solutions in M-theory II: Global solutions asymptotic to $AdS_7 \times S^4$ ([arXiv:0810.4647](http://arxiv.org/abs/0810.4647))
  {#HEGK}

[[!redirects 6d (2,0)-susy QFT]]
[[!redirects 6d (2,0)-superconformal QFT]]