
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### 2-Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include 2-category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Rigged limits
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A **rigged limit** is a [[2-limit]] which is [[created limit|created]] in 2-categories of algebras and [[lax morphisms|lax]], colax, or pseudo morphisms for a 2-monad.

In order to characterize these most precisely, however, it turns out to be convenient to generalize from [[2-categories]] to [[F-categories]], using the corresponding notions of $\mathcal{F}$-monad, $\mathcal{F}$-limit, and so on.

## Definition

Let $D$ be a [[small category|small]] strict $\mathcal{F}$-[[F-category|category]].  Then we have the [[functor category|functor]] $\mathcal{F}$-category $[D,\mathcal{F}]$ (where $\mathcal{F}$ denotes the $\mathcal{F}$-category $\mathcal{F}$).  An object of $[D,\mathcal{F}]$ is an $\mathcal{F}$-functor $\Phi\colon D\to \mathcal{F}$, which can be identified with a pair of 2-functors $\Phi_\tau\colon D_\tau \to Cat$ and $\Phi_\lambda\colon D_\lambda\to Cat$ together with a 2-natural transformation
$$\array{D_\tau & & \overset{J_D}{\to} & & D_\lambda\\
  & {}_{\Phi_\tau}\searrow & \neArrow & \swarrow_{\Phi_\lambda} \\
  & & Cat } $$
whose components are full embeddings (objects of $\mathcal{F}$).

The [[tight morphisms]] in $[D,\mathcal{F}]$ are $\mathcal{F}$-natural transformations in the usual sense of enriched category theory, whereas its [[loose morphisms]] are 2-natural transformations between loose parts.

We also have an $\mathcal{F}$-category $Oplax(D,\mathcal{F})$ with the same objects, whose loose morphisms are [[oplax natural transformations]] between loose parts which are strictly 2-natural on tight morphisms, and whose tight morphisms are those whose components are all tight.  The inclusion
$$ [D,\mathcal{F}] \to Oplax(D,\mathcal{F}) $$
has a left adjoint, which induces an $\mathcal{F}$-[[comonad]] $\mathcal{Q}_c^D$ on $[D,\mathcal{F}]$.

+-- {: .un_defn}
###### Definition
A weight $\Phi\colon D\to \mathcal{F}$ is **$l$-rigged** if

1. It is a $\mathcal{Q}_c^D$-coalgebra, and
1. The canonical functor $Lan_{J_D} \Phi_\tau \to \Phi_\lambda$ is surjective on objects.
=--

We obtain definitions of **$c$-rigged** and **$p$-rigged** weights if we replace $Oplax(D,\mathcal{F})$ by $Lax(D,\mathcal{F})$ and $Pseudo(D,\mathcal{F})$, respectively.

## Characterization

Let $w$ denote one of $l$, $c$, or $p$.

+-- {: .un_theorem}
###### Theorem
For an $\mathcal{F}$-weight $\Phi$, the following are equivalent.

1. $\Phi$ is $w$-rigged.
1. For any $\mathcal{F}$-monad $T$ on an $\mathcal{F}$-category $K$, the $\mathcal{F}$-functor $U_w\colon T Alg_w \to K$ creates $\Phi$-weighted limits.
1. For any 2-monad $T$ on a 2-category $K$, the functor $U_w\colon T Alg_w \to K$ (where $K$ denotes the chordate $\mathcal{F}$-category on $K$) creates $\Phi$-weighted limits.
=--

See ([LS](#LS)) for the proof.

## Examples

The following limits are $l$-rigged.

* The [[2-limit]] of any diagram of tight morphisms which is also a limit as a diagram of loose morphisms.  This includes any [[product]] and any [[power]].

* The [[oplax limit]] of any diagram of loose morphisms.

* The [[inserter]] of a [[parallel pair]] $f,g\colon A\to B$ such that $f$ (the domain of the 2-cell to be inserted) is tight.  Here the projection to $A$ is tight and tightness-detecting.

* The [[equifier]] of a parallel pair of 2-cells between a parallel pair of 1-morphisms $f,g\colon A\to B$ such that $f$ (the domain of the 2-cells) is tight.  Again, the projection to $A$ is tight and tightness-detecting.

* The [[Eilenberg-Moore object]] of a loose monad.  Here the canonical forgetful morphism is tight and tightness-detecting.

Each has a fairly obvious dual version which is $c$-rigged.  There are $p$-rigged versions as well, but $p$-rigged weights are almost equivalent to [[PIE-limits]]; see ([LS](#LS)) for details.

## References

* [[Stephen Lack]], "Limits for lax morphisms". *Appl. Categ. Structures*,
13(3):189--203, 2005

* [[Stephen Lack]] and [[Mike Shulman]], "Enhanced 2-categories and limits for lax morphisms", [arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/1104.2111).
 {#LS}

[[!redirects rigged limit]]
[[!redirects rigged limits]]
[[!redirects l-rigged limit]]
[[!redirects l-rigged limits]]
[[!redirects c-rigged limit]]
[[!redirects c-rigged limits]]
[[!redirects p-rigged limit]]
[[!redirects p-rigged limits]]

