
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

For $\Delta$ the [[simplex category]] the [[functor category]] $sSet^{\Delta}$ is that of [[cosimplicial object]]s in [[simplicial set]]s: [[cosimplicial simplicial set]]s.

There are various standard [[model category]] structures on this category. The [[Reedy model structure]] is discussed in ([BousfieldKan](#BousfieldKan)), the injective structure is discussed in ([Jardine](#Jardine)).

## Properties

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The [[totalization]] of a cosimplicial simplicial set $X^\bullet$ coincides with the [[sSet]]-enriched [[hom-object]]

$$
  Tot(X_\bullet) = sSet^{\Delta}(\Delta, X_\bullet)
  \,,
$$

where $\Delta : [k] \mapsto \Delta[k]$ is the canonical cosimplicial simplicial set given by the [[simplex]]-assignment.

Since $\Delta$ is cofibrant in the [[Reedy model structure]] it follows that totalization of Reedy-fibrant cosimplicial simplicial sets preserves weak equivalences. The following lists situations in which totalization respects weak equivalences even without this assumption.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

For $G^\bullet \to H^\bullet$ a morphism of [[cosimplicial object|cosimplicial]] [[groupoid]]s which is degreewise an [[equivalence of categories|equivalence]], also the induced morphism of [[totalization]]s

$$
  Tot(G^\bullet) \to Tot(H^\bullet)
$$

is a weak equivalence (of [[simplicial set]]s).

=--

This is ([Jardine, corollary 12](#Jardine)).

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

For $G^\bullet \to H^\bullet$ a degreewise weak equivalence of [[strict 2-category|strict]] [[2-groupoid]]s, the resulting morphism

$$
  \pi_0 Tot(G^\bullet) \to \pi_0 Tot(H^\bullet)
$$

is an [[isomorphism]].

=--

This is ([Yekutieli, theorem 2.4](#Yekutieli)).


## References

The [[Reedy model structure]] on $sSet^{\Delta}$ is discussed in  Chapter X of

* [[Aldridge Bousfield]] and [[Dan Kan]], _Homotopy limits, completions and localizations_ Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1972. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 304.
 {#BousfieldKan}

The [[model structure on functors|injective model structure]] is discussed in

* [[Rick Jardine]], _Cosimplicial spaces and cocycles_ ([pdf](http://www.math.uwo.ca/~jardine/papers/preprints/cosimp3.pdf))
 {#Jardine}

Totalization of cosimplicisl strict [[2-groupoid]]s is considered in 

* [[Amnon Yekutieli]], _Combinatorial Descent Data for Gerbes_ ([arXiv:1109.1919](http://arxiv.org/abs/1109.1919))
 {#Yekutieli}
 
[[!redirects model structure on cosimplicial spaces]]