
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Topology
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Properties
 {: #title}

There is a classic theorem about maps from [[compact spaces]] to [[Hausdorff spaces]] which states:

+-- {: .num_theorem #theorema .thplain }
###### Theorem ######
Let $C$ be a [[compact space]] and $H$ be a [[Hausdorff space]]. Let $f\colon C \to H$ be a [[continuous map|continuous]] [[bijection]]. Then $f$ is a [[homeomorphism]].
=--

An immediate corollary is that the two spaces involved are both [[compact Hausdorff spaces]].

The idea that this captures is that Hausdorffness is about having "enough" open sets whilst compactness is about having "not too many". Thus a [[compact Hausdorff space]] has both "enough" and "not too many". This theorem says that both conditions are at their limit: if we try to have more open sets, we lose compactness. If we try to have fewer open sets, we lose Hausdorffness.

The above theorem is a special case of a slightly more general result.

+-- {: .num_theorem #theoremb .thplain }
###### Theorem ######
Let $C$ be a [[compact space]] and $H$ be a [[Hausdorff space]]. Let $f\colon C \to H$ be a [[continuous map]]. Then $f$ is [[closed map|closed]] and [[proper map|proper]].
=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof


To prove this, we need to show that a closed subset of $C$ is taken to a closed subset of $H$ and that the preimage of a compact subset of $H$ is compact in $C$.  Both follow from the fact that closed subsets of a compact set are compact and that compact subsets of a Hausdorff space are closed.

For the first, let $D \subseteq C$ be closed. As it is a closed subset of a compact space, it is compact. Since $f$ is continuous, $f(D)$ is a compact subset of $H$. Thus as $H$ is a Hausdorff space, $f(D)$ is closed.

For the second, let $G \subseteq H$ be compact.  As it is a compact subset of a Hausdorff space, it is closed.  Thus as $f$ is continuous, $f^{-1}(G)$ is closed in $C$.  Hence as $C$ is compact, $f^{-1}(G)$ is compact.

=--

## Related entries

* [[compact subspaces of Hausdorff spaces are closed]]

* [[a CW-complex is a Hausdorff space]]


[[!redirects map from compact space to Hausdorff space]]
[[!redirects map from a compact space to a Hausdorff space]]
[[!redirects maps from a compact space to a Hausdorff space]]
[[!redirects maps from compact spaces to Hausdorff spaces]]
