
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Functorial quantum field theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functorial quantum field theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The local data for a [[CFT]] in [[dimension]] $d$ allows to assign to each $d$-[[dimension]]al [[cobordism]] $\Sigma$ a [[vector space]] of "possible correlator"s: those functions on the space of [[conformal structure]]s on $\Sigma$ that have the correct behaviour to qualify as the (chiral) [[correlator]] of a CFT. This is called a space of [[conformal blocks]] $Bl(\Sigma)$. This assignment is [[functor|functorial]] under [[diffeomorphism]]. The corresponding functor is called a **modular functor**. ([Segal 89](#Segal89), [Segal 04, def. 5.1](#Segal04))

To get an actual collection of correlators one has to choose from each space of conformal blocks $Bl(\Sigma)$ an element such that these choices glue under composition of [[cobordism]]: such that they solve the [[sewing constraints]], see for instance at _[[FRS-theorem on rational 2d CFT]]_.

Dually, under a [[holographic principle]] such as [[AdS3-CFT2 and CS-WZW correspondence|CS3/WZW2]] the space of [[conformal blocks]] on $\Sigma$ is equivalently the [[space of quantum states]] of the [[TQFT]] on $\Sigma$. See at _[[quantization of 3d Chern-Simons theory]]_ for more on this.

## Properties

### Relation to equivariant ellitpic cohomology / equivariant $tmf$

The modular functor for $G$-[[Chern-Simons theory]] restricted to [[genus of a surface|genus-1 surfaces]] ([[elliptic curves]]) is essentially what is encoded in the universal $G$-[[equivariant elliptic cohomology]] (equivariant [[tmf]]). In fact equivariant elliptic cohomology remembers also the [[local prequantum field theory|pre-quantum]] incarnation of the modular functor as a systems of [[prequantum line bundles]] over Chern-Simons [[phase spaces]] (which are [[moduli stacks of flat connections]]) and remembers the [[quantization]]-process from there to the actual [[space of quantum states]] by forming holomorphic [[sections]]. See at _[equivariant elliptic cohomology -- Idea -- Interpretation in Quantum field theory](equivariant+elliptic+cohomology#InterpretationInQuantumFieldTheory)_ for more on this.

## References

Original formulations include

* {#Segal89} [[Graeme Segal]], _Two-dimensional conformal field theories and modular functors_, in: IXth International Congress on Mathematical Physics (Swansee 1988), Hilger, Bristol
1989, pp. 22-37

* {#Segal04} [[Graeme Segal]], _The definition of conformal field theory_, Topology, geometry and quantum field theory London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., 308, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, (2004), 421-577

* [[Igor Kriz]], _On spin and modularity in conformal field theory_, Ann. Sci. ANS (4) 36 (2003), no. 1, 57112


Lectures and reviews include

* [[Bojko Bakalov]], [[Alexander Kirillov]], _Lectures on tensor categories and modular functor_ ([web](http://www.math.sunysb.edu/~kirillov/tensor/tensor.html))

* {#Gawedzki99} [[Krzysztof Gawędzki]], section 5.6 of _Conformal field theory: a case study_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9904145](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9904145))

A nice review with a new concise construction is in

* {#Looijenga10} [[Eduard Looijenga]], _From WZW models to Modular Functors_ ([arXiv:1009.2245](http://arxiv.org/abs/1009.2245))


Discussion in the context of [[(2,1)-dimensional Euclidean field theories and tmf]] is in

* {#StolzTeichner11} [[Stefan Stolz]], [[Peter Teichner]], section 5.2 of _Supersymmetric field theories and generalized cohomology_, in [[Hisham Sati]], [[Urs Schreiber]] (eds.), _[Mathematical foundations of Quantum field theory and String theory](http://ncatlab.org/schreiber/show/Mathematical+Foundations+of+Quantum+Field+and+Perturbative+String+Theory#ContributionStolzTeichner)_, Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, Volume 83, AMS (2011)



A generalization of the modular functors is in

* [[Igor Kriz]], Luhang Lai, _On the definition and K-theory realization of a modular functor_, ([arxiv/1310.5174](http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.5174)).
 

[[!redirects modular functors]]