#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea 

Let $G$ and $H$ be [[graph|simple graphs]]. Then $H$ is a **graph minor** of $G$ if it is isomorphic to a graph obtained by applying a sequence of operations of the following sort, starting from $G$: 

* Removing edges; 

* Removing isolated points; 

* Contracting edges, where contracting an edge means removing it and identifying its endpoints. 

## Definition via subquotients 

The operations of interest can be expressed in categorical terms; there is a nice category of simple graphs such that a graph minor is the same thing as a subquotient in this category. Namely, we take the point of view that a simple graph is essentially the same thing as a set $V$ equipped with a reflexive symmetric relation $E$, and a morphism of simple graphs is a function which respects these relations. Indeed, such a relation determines and is uniquely determined by a simple graph $G$ where for given vertices $x, y \in V$, there is an edge between $x$ and $y$ in $G$ iff both $E(x, y)$ and $x \neq y$. 

Notice that the contraction of edges is neatly captured by quotients in this category. For example, if we want to contract a collection of edges by identifying points along an equivalence relation $R$, that is via a quotient map $q \colon V \to V/R$, then we simply take the image of the composite 

$$E \hookrightarrow V \times V \stackrel{q \times q}{\to} V/R \times V/R;$$ 

notice this image is a reflexive symmetric relation on $V/R$. While it might seem more natural to use instead an _irreflexive_ relation for _loop-free graphs_ (a relation $E$ being **irreflexive** if it has empty intersection with the diagonal in $V \times V$), the fact of the matter is that irreflexive relations are not closed under the taking of images, and we cannot express so neatly the contraction operations by taking a quotient in the category of symmetric irreflexive operations. 

Thus, we let $SimpGph$ denote the category of sets equipped with a reflexive symmetric relation. This category has many convenient properties: 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 
$SimpGph$ is a [[Grothendieck quasitopos]], in particular [[regular category|regular]] and even a [[logos]]. The opposite category $SimpGph^{op}$ is also regular. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_prop} 
###### Proposition 
The underlying vertex-set functor $Vert \colon SimpGph \to Set$ reflects and preserves monos and epis, and preserves all limits and colimits. 
=-- 

For details on these results, see [[category of simple graphs]]. 

+-- {: .num_defn} 
###### Definition 
A contraction of a simple graph $G$ is a quotient = regular epi $G \to H$. A subgraph is a mono $H \hookrightarrow H'$ in $SimpGph$. A **graph minor** is a subquotient in $SimpGph$: 
\[\array{
G & \twoheadrightarrow & G' \\
 & & \uparrow^\mathrlap{mono} \\
 & & H
}\]
 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_prop} 
###### Proposition 
The graph minor relation is reflexive and transitive. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
Reflexivity is clear. For transitivity, we compose subquotients by taking a pushout square as follows. 

$$\array{
G & \twoheadrightarrow & G' & \twoheadrightarrow & G'' \\
 & &  ^\mathllap{mono} \uparrow & & \uparrow^\mathrlap{mono} \\
 & & H & \twoheadrightarrow & H' \\
 & & & & \uparrow^\mathrlap{mono} \\
 & & & & J
}$$

where we use the simple fact that the pushout of a mono along an arrow in $SimpGph$ is a mono (because $Vert$ reflects monos and preserves monos and pushouts, plus the fact that the pushout of a mono in $Set$ is a mono). 
=-- 

For finite graphs, the graph minor relation is also antisymmetric (if $G$ and $H$ are minors of one another, then they are isomorphic). Indeed, if either the arrow $G \twoheadrightarrow G'$ or the arrow $H \hookrightarrow G'$ is not an isomorphism, then $H$ has strictly fewer edges and vertices than $G$. This is clearly not the case for infinite graphs (e.g., the infinite rooted binary tree without leaves contains as a subgraph a disjoint sum of two copies of itself). 

## Minor-closed families 

* The collection of forests is closed under the graph minor relation. 

* The collection of planar graphs is closed under the graph minor relation. 

## Graph minor theorem 

This celebrated result of Robertson and Seymour says that no collection of finite graphs, ordered by the graph minor relation, has an infinite [[antichain]]. Equivalently, that in any collection of finite graphs, there are only finitely many elements which are minimal with respect to the graph minor relation. 

As a corollary, any class $F$ of finite graphs which is closed under minors admits a **forbidden minor characterization**: is precisely the class of graphs which do not have any members of a specific finite family of graphs
as a minor. (Proof: the complement of $F$ in the poset of finite graphs has finitely many minimal members. Then, $x$ belongs to $F$ iff none of these minimal members occurs as a minor of $x$. 

For example, the class of forests is precisely the class of finite graphs which do not have a triangle $K_3$ as a minor. The class of planar graphs is precisely the class of finite graphs which do not have $K_5$ or $K_{3, 3}$ as a minor. 

Forbidden minor characterizations also exist for certain classes of [[matroid|matroids]]. (See for example Wikipedia [here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matroid#Forbidden_minors).) 

## References 

* Wikipedia article on graph minors [(link)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minor_%28graph_theory%29)
