> This entry is about the concept if [[quantum field theory]]. For the [[Euler beta function]], related to the [[Gamma function]], see there.


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebraic Quantum Field Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include AQFT and operator algebra contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In statistical field theory and in [[perturbative quantum field theory]], what is called the _beta function_ is the [[logarithm|logarithmic]] [[derivative]] of the [[running of the coupling constants]] under [[renormalization group flow]]. See there for more.


## References

The original informal discussion of beta functions for [[scaling transformations]] is due to

* {#GellMannLow54} [[Murray Gell-Mann]] and F. E. Low, _Quantum Electrodynamics at Small Distances_, Phys. Rev. 95 (5) (1954), 1300–1312 ([pdf](http://www.fafnir.phyast.pitt.edu/py3765/GellManLow.pdf))

there denoted "$\psi$". The notation "$\beta$" is due to

* {#Callan70} [[Curtis Callan]], _Broken Scale Invariance in Scalar Field Theory_, Phys. Rev. D 2, 1541, 1970 ([doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.2.1541](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.2.1541))

* {#Symanzik70} [[Kurt Symanzik]],  _Small distance behaviour in field theory and power counting_, Communications in Mathematical Physics. 18 (3): 227–246 ([doi:10.1007/BF01649434](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01649434))

Formulation in the rigorous context of [[causal perturbation theory]]/[[pAQFT]], via the [[main theorem of perturbative renormalization]], is due to

* {#BrunettiDuetschFredenhagen09} [[Romeo Brunetti]], [[Michael Dütsch]], [[Klaus Fredenhagen]], _Perturbative Algebraic Quantum Field Theory and the Renormalization Groups_, Adv. Theor. Math. Physics 13 (2009), 1541-1599 ([arXiv:0901.2038](https://arxiv.org/abs/0901.2038))

reviewed in

* {#Duetsch18} [[Michael Dütsch]], section 3.5.3 of _[[From classical field theory
to perturbative quantum field theory]]_, 2018



[[!redirects beta functions]]

[[!redirects beta-function]]
[[!redirects beta-functions]]
