
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Gravity
+--{: .hide}
[[!include gravity contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The theory of [[gravity]] in $3+1$ dimensions famously has [[black hole]] solutions, being the limiting configuration of a _point_ mass gravitational source. In higher dimensional gravity, and in particular in higher dimensional [[supergravity]], there are analogous solutions, which however are limiting configurations of a gravitational source that is supported on a line, or a surface, or a higher dimensional space. For a surface one might speak of _black [[membrane]]_ solutions hence generally of _black brane_ solutions.

## Properties

### Weak coupling correspondence

The types of black branes that can occur in theories of [[supergravity]] that are obtained from the maximal [[11-dimensional supergravity]] match precisely the types of [[D-brane]]s and [[NS-brane]]s that appear in the corresponding perturbative [[superstring theories]].

The idea is that both these brane-phenomena are aspects of one single entity: 

* At low string coupling the [[D-brane]]/[[NS-brane]] description is accurate. Low string coupling implies that the coupling of [[gravity]] is weak, hence that the back-reaction of the branes on the background geometry is negligible.

* At large string coupling but low energy, the [[effective field theory|effective]] [[supergravity]] description becomes accurate. Here the branes do back-react on the gravitational background and hence create the _black brane_ spacetime geometry.

This duality of the brane picture is at the heart of the [[AdS/CFT correspondence]]. See there for more details.

## Examples

* [[black hole]]

* [[black string]]

* [[black membrane]]

* [[black fivebrane]]

## Related concepts

[[!include table of branes]]


## References

Reviews include

section 1.3 of 

* [[Ofer Aharony]], S.S. Gubser, [[Juan Maldacena]], H. Ooguri, Y. Oz, _Large N Field Theories, String Theory and Gravity_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9905111](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9905111))

Recent developments include

* Jay Armas, Joan Camps, Troels Harmark, Niels A. Obers, _The Young Modulus of Black Strings and the Fine Structure of Blackfolds_ ([arXiv:1110.4835](http://arxiv.org/abs/1110.4835)) 
 
[[!redirects black branes]]
[[!redirects black p-brane]]
[[!redirects black p-branes]]
