
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### $\infty$-Wess-Zumino-Witten theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-Wess-Zumino-Witten theory - contents]]
=--
#### Quantum field theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functorial quantum field theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The 4-dimensional version of [[higher dimensional WZW theory]], the boundary theory of the [[higher dimensional Chern-Simons theory|5-dimensional Chern-Simons theory]] that is induced from the third [[Chern class]]. Also called _Nair-Schiff theory_ or _Kähler Chern-Simons theory_ .

## Properties

### Equations of motion

The [[Euler-Lagrange equations]] of the 4d WZW model are those of [[self-dual Yang-Mills theory]].

### Finiteness

The model is finite at 1-loop ([Ketov](#Ketov)) and expected to be finite to all orders.

## References

* [[Ali Chamseddine]], Phys. Lett. B233, 291 (1989);

* V.P.Nair, _Kähler-Chern-Simons Theory_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9110042](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9110042))

* A. Losev, [[Greg Moore]], [[Nikita Nekrasov]], Samson Shatashvili, _Four-Dimensional Avatars of Two-Dimensional RCFT_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9509151](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9509151))

* Takeo Inami, Hiroaki Kanno, Tatsuya Ueno, Chuan-Sheng Xiong, _Two-toroidal Lie Algebra as Current Algebra of Four-dimensional Kähler WZW Model_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9610187](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9610187))

* A. V. Ketov, Phys.Lett. B383 (1996) 390-396 
 {#Ketov}

* T. Inami, H. Kanno and T. Ueno, Mod. Phys. Lett. A12, 2757 (1997).

* J. Gegenberg , G. Kunstatter, _Boundary Dynamics of Higher Dimensional AdS Spacetime_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9905228](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9905228))


* J. Gegenberg , G. Kunstatter, _Boundary Dynamics of Higher Dimensional Chern-Simons Gravity_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0010020](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0010020))



[[!redirects 4d WZW models]]

[[!redirects 4d Wess-Zumino-Witten model]]
[[!redirects 4d Wess-Zumino-Witten models]]

[[!redirects 4d WZW theory]]