pages/7004.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Semantics
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

Semantics is the interpretation of the [[syntax]] of a [[theory]] in a [[model]].

## Examples

### Categorical semantics of dependent type theory

Notably the [[semantics]] of [[type theory|type theories]] is given by [[categories]]. For instance 

* [[dependent type theory]] is precisely the formal language for which [[locally cartesian closed categories]] are the semantics, 

* [[intensional type theory]]is the formal language for which [[locally cartesian closed (infinity,1)-categories]] are the semantics;

* [[homotopy type theory]] is the formal language for which [[elementary (infinity,1)-toposes]] are the semantics.

For more on this see at _[[categorical semantics]]_ and at _[[relation between type theory and category theory]]_. 

## Related concepts

* [[categorical semantics]];

* [[denotational semantics]], [[operational semantics]];

* [[geometric models for modal logics]];

* [[syntax - semantics duality]]

category:logic


[[!redirects semantics]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 105717 Revision date: 2016-02-16 11:39:32 Page name: semantics Author: Zoran Škoda IP address: 161.53.130.104

pages/7004.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Semantics
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

Semantics is the interpretation of the [[syntax]] of a [[theory]] in a [[model]].

See a separate page for [[semantics of a programming language]].

## Examples

### Categorical semantics of dependent type theory

Notably the [[semantics]] of [[type theory|type theories]] is given by [[categories]]. For instance 

* [[dependent type theory]] is precisely the formal language for which [[locally cartesian closed categories]] are the semantics, 

* [[intensional type theory]]is the formal language for which [[locally cartesian closed (infinity,1)-categories]] are the semantics;

* [[homotopy type theory]] is the formal language for which [[elementary (infinity,1)-toposes]] are the semantics.

For more on this see at _[[categorical semantics]]_ and at _[[relation between type theory and category theory]]_. 

## Related concepts

* [[categorical semantics]];

* [[denotational semantics]], [[operational semantics]];

* [[geometric models for modal logics]];

* [[syntax - semantics duality]]

category:logic


[[!redirects semantics]]
