
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
#### Homotopy theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[intensional type theory]], [[identity types]] behave like [[path space objects]]; this viewpoint is called [[homotopy type theory]].  This induces furthermore a notion of [[homotopy fibers]], hence of [[homotopy equivalence]]s between [[types]].

On the other hand, if type theory contains a [[universe]] [[Type]], so that types can be considered as *points* of $Type$, then between two types we also have an [[identity type]] $Paths_{Type}(X,Y)$.  The _univalence axiom_ says that these two notions of "sameness" for types are the same.  Morally, this says that [[Type]] behaves like an [[object classifier]].

The name *univalence* (due to Voevodsky) comes from the following reasoning.  A fibration or bundle $p\colon E\to B$ of some sort is commonly said to be *universal* if every other bundle of the same sort is a pullback of $p$ in a unique way (up to homotopy).  Less commonly, a bundle is said to be *versal* if every other bundle is a pullback of it in *some* way, not necessarily unique.  By contrast, a bundle is said to be *univalent* if every other bundle is a pullback of it in *at most one* way (up to homotopy).  The univalence axiom then says that the canonical fibration over $Type$ is univalent.


## Definition

Let $X$ and $Y$ be types.  There is a canonically defined map from the type $(X = Y)$ of paths (in [[Type]]) between them to the type $(X \simeq Y)$ of [[equivalences]] between them.  It can be defined by *path induction*, i.e. the eliminator for the identity types, by specifying that it takes the identity path $1_X \colon (X=X)$ to the identity equivalence of $X$.

**Univalence:** _For any two [[types]] $X,Y$, this map $(X=Y)\to (X\simeq Y)$ is an equivalence._

Univalence is a commonly assumed axiom in [[homotopy type theory]], and is central to the proposal ([Voevodsky](#Voevodsky)) that this provides a natively [[homotopy theory|homotopy theoretic]] [[foundation]] of [[mathematics]] (the _Univalent Foundations Project_.)

## Properties

The univalence axiom implies [[function extensionality]].


## References

The univalence axiom was introduced and promoted independntly by [[Steve Awodey]] and [[Vladimir Voevodsky]] around 2005/06.

* _Univalent Foundations Project_ ([pdf](http://www.math.ias.edu/~vladimir/Site3/Univalent_Foundations_files/univalent_foundations_project.pdf))

A quick survey is for instance in

* [[Peter Aczel]], _On Voevodsky's univalence axiom_ ([pdf](http://www.cs.man.ac.uk/~petera/Recent-Slides/Edinburgh-2011-slides_pap.pdf))

An exposition is at 

* [[Mike Shulman]], _Homotopy type theory, IV_ ([blog post](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2011/04/homotopy_type_theory_iv.html))

The [[HoTT]]-[[Coq]] code is at

* _[HoTT/Coq/Univalence.v](https://github.com/HoTT/HoTT/blob/master/Coq/Univalence.v)_

* _[HoTT/Coq/UnivalenceAxiom.v](https://github.com/HoTT/HoTT/blob/master/Coq/UnivalenceAxiom.v)_

A guided walk through the formal proof that univalence implies functional extensionality is at

* [[Andrej Bauer]], [[Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine]], _[[Oberwolfach HoTT-Coq tutorial]]_


For more references see _[[homotopy type theory]]_.


[[!redirects univalence]]
[[!redirects univalent foundations]]
