pages/7029.md, before:

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

An [[action]]

$$
  \rho : G \times X \to X
$$

of a group $G$ on a set $X$ is **free** if for every $x \in X$ and every $g\in G$, 
the equation $g x = x$ implies $g=1_G$.
Equivalently, an action is free when for any pair of elements $x,y \in X$, there is _at most one_ group element $g \in G$ such that $g x = y$.

## Examples

* Any group $G$ acts freely on itself by multiplication $\cdot : G \times G \to G$, which is called the (left) [[regular representation]] of $G$.

* For any set $X$ equipped with a [[transitive action]] $* : G \times X \to X$, the group $Aut_G(X)$ of $G$-equivariant automorphisms of $X$ (i.e., [[bijections]] $\phi : X \to X$ commuting with the action of $G$) acts freely on $X$.  In particular, suppose $\phi \in Aut_G(X)$ is such that $\phi(x) = x$ for some $x\in X$, and let $y\in X$ be arbitrary.  By the assumption that $G$ acts transitively, there is a $g \in G$ such that $y = g*x$. But then $G$-equivariance implies that $\phi(y) = \phi(g*x) = g*\phi(x) = g*x = y$. Since this holds for all $y\in Y$, $\phi$ must be equal to the identity $\phi = id_X$, and therefore $Aut_G(X)$ acts freely on $X$.


## Related concepts

* [[homogeneous space]]
* [[transitive action]]
* [[torsor]]
* [[universal principal bundle]]

[[!redirects free actions]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 108217 Revision date: 2016-05-02 10:21:30 Page name: free action Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 131.220.184.222

pages/7029.md, after:

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

An [[action]]

$$
  \rho : G \times X \to X
$$

of a group $G$ on a set $X$ is **free** if for every $x \in X$ and every $g\in G$,  the equation $g x = x$ implies $g=1_G$.
Equivalently, an action is free when for any pair of elements $x,y \in X$, there is _at most one_ group element $g \in G$ such that $g x = y$.

A free action that is also [[transitive action|transitive]] is called _[[regular action|regular]]_.

## Examples

* Any group $G$ acts freely on itself by multiplication $\cdot : G \times G \to G$, which is called the (left) [[regular representation]] of $G$.

* For any set $X$ equipped with a [[transitive action]] $* : G \times X \to X$, the group $Aut_G(X)$ of $G$-equivariant automorphisms of $X$ (i.e., [[bijections]] $\phi : X \to X$ commuting with the action of $G$) acts freely on $X$.  In particular, suppose $\phi \in Aut_G(X)$ is such that $\phi(x) = x$ for some $x\in X$, and let $y\in X$ be arbitrary.  By the assumption that $G$ acts transitively, there is a $g \in G$ such that $y = g*x$. But then $G$-equivariance implies that $\phi(y) = \phi(g*x) = g*\phi(x) = g*x = y$. Since this holds for all $y\in Y$, $\phi$ must be equal to the identity $\phi = id_X$, and therefore $Aut_G(X)$ acts freely on $X$.


## Related concepts

* [[homogeneous space]]
* [[transitive action]]
* [[torsor]]
* [[universal principal bundle]]

[[!redirects free actions]]
