
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

There are various different paradigms for the interpretation of predicate [[logic]] in [[type theory]].  In "logic-enriched type theory", there is a separate class of "propositions" from the class of "types".  But we can also identify propositions with particular types.  In the [[propositions as types]] paradigm, every proposition is a type, and also every type is identified with a proposition (the proposition that it is [[inhabited]]).

By contrast, in the paradigm that may be called *propositions as some types*, every proposition is a type, but not every type is a proposition.  The types which are propositions are generally those which "have at most one inhabitant" --- in [[homotopy type theory]] this is called being of [[h-level 1]] or being a $(-1)$-type.  This paradigm is often used in the [[categorical semantics]] of type theory, such as the [[internal logic]] of various kinds of categories.

Under "propositions as types", all type-theoretic operations represent corresponding logical operations ([[dependent sum]] is the [[existential quantifier]], [[dependent product]] the [[universal quantifier]], and so on).  However, under "propositions as some types", not every such operation preserves the class of propositions; this is particularly the case for [[dependent sum]] and [[or]].  Thus, in order to obtain the correct logical operations, we need to reflect these constructions back into propositions somehow, finding the "underlying proposition", corresponding to the [[truncated|(-1)-truncation]]/[[h-level 1|h-level 1-projection]].  This operation in type theory is called the **bracket type** (when denoted $[A]$); in [[homotopy type theory]] it can be identified with the [[higher inductive type]] $isInhab$.


## Properties

One presentation of the [[internal logic|internal]] [[type theory]] of 
[[regular categories]] consists of [[dependent type theory]] with the [[unit type]], 
[[strong extensional equality types]], strong [[dependent sums]], and bracket types.  (The internal logic of a regular category can alternatively be presented as a [[logic-enriched type theory]].)


## Semantics

The [[semantics]] of bracket types in a [[regular category]] $C$ is as follows.

A [[dependent type]] (a type in [[context]] $X$)

$$x\colon X \vdash A(x) \colon Type$$

is interpreted in $C$ as an arbitrary [[morphism]]

$$
  \array{
    A
    \\  
    \downarrow
    \\
    X
  }
  \,.
$$

The corresponding bracket type

$$ x\colon X \vdash [A(x)] \colon Type $$

is interpreted then as the [[image]]-[[(epi, mono) factorization system|factorization]] 

$$
  \array{
     A &&\to&& [A] & := im(A \to X)
     \\
     & \searrow && \swarrow
     \\
     && X
    \,.
  }
$$

Therefore $[A] \to X$ is a [[monomorphism]], and hence the interpretation of a [[proposition]] about the elements of $X$.

## References

The original articles are

* M.E. Maietti, _The Type Theory of Categorical Universes_ PhD thesis, Universit&agrave; Delgi Studi di Padova, 1998

(which speaks of "mono types"),

* F. Pfenning, _Intensionality, extensionality, and proof irrelevance in modal type theory_, In Proceedings of the 16th Annual Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS'01), June 2001. 

* [[Steve Awodey]], [[Andrej Bauer]], _Propositions as $[$Types$]$_, Journal of Logic and Computation. Volume 14, Issue 4, August 2004, pp. 447-471 ([pdf](http://andrej.com/papers/brackets_letter.pdf))

[[!redirects bracket types]]
