
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Fields and quanta
+--{: .hide}
[[!include fields and quanta - table]]
=--
#### Quantum Field Theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include AQFT and operator algebra contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Quantum hadrodynamics is (or should be) an [[effective field theory]] that describes [[confinement|confined]] [[bound states]] in [[nuclear physics]]: [[hadrons]].

In this sense [[chiral perturbation theory]] is the archetype of quantum hadrodynamics, but the latter term is commonly used more specifically for the [[Walecka model]] and its generalizations to [[baryon chiral perturbation theory]], where the [[baryons]] and specifically the [[nucleons]] appear as explicit [[effective field theory|effective]] [[field (physics)|fields]] (as opposed to as emergent [[Skyrmion]] fields).


## Related concepts

* [[Walecka model]]

* [[hadron supersymmetry]], [[hadron Kaluza-Klein theory]]

  * [[flavor branes]]

* [[leptonic decay]]

[[!include effective field theories of nuclear physics -- contents]]


## References

See the references at _[[chiral perturbation theory]]_

### Hadrodynamics with explicit nucleon fields

The original articles on [[quantum hadrodynamics]] with explicit [[nucleon]] [[field (physics)|fields]] (as opposed to [[soliton|solitonic]] [[Skyrmions]]):

The original [[Walecka model]] (*QHD-I model*), with [[nucleons]] coupled to [[sigma-meson]] and [[omega-meson]]:

* [[John Dirk Walecka]], _A Theory of highly condensed matter_, Annals Phys. 83 (1974) 491 ([spire:91609](http://inspirehep.net/record/91609?ln=en), <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-4916(74)90208-5">dpi:10.1016/0003-4916(74)90208-5</a>)

Inclusion also of the [[pion]] and the [[rho-meson]] (the _QHD-II model_):

* [[Brian Serot]], _A relativistic nuclear field theory with $\pi$ and $\rho$ mesons_, Physics Letters B Volume 86, Issue 2, 24 (1979), Pages 146-150 (<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0370-2693(79)90804-9">doi:10.1016/0370-2693(79)90804-9</a>)



* [[Brian Serot]], _Quantum hadrodynamics_, Reports on Progress in Physics, Volume 55, Number 11 (1992) ([doi:10.1088/0034-4885/55/11/001](https://doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/55/11/001))

* [[Brian Serot]], [[John Dirk Walecka]], _Chiral QHD with vector mesons_, Acta Phys. Polon. B 23 (1992) 655-679 ([spire:343513](https://inspirehep.net/literature/343513))


* [[Maciej Nowak]], [[Mannque Rho]], [[Ismail Zahed]], _[[Chiral Nuclear Dynamics]]_,  World Scientific 1996 ([doi:10.1142/1681](https://doi.org/10.1142/1681))

* [[Brian Serot]], [[John Dirk Walecka]], _Recent Progress in Quantum Hadrodynamics_,  Int. J. Mod. Phys. E6:515-631, 1997 ([arXiv:nucl-th/9701058](http://arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/9701058))

Inclusion of [[electromagnetism]]:

* A. Yu. Korchin, D. Van Neck, M. Waroquier, _Electromagnetic interaction in chiral quantum hadrodynamics and decay of vector and axial-vector mesons_, Phys. Rev. C67 (2003) 015207 ([arXiv:nucl-th/0302042](https://arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/0302042))

Relation to [[quark-meson coupling model]]:

* Koichi Saito, _Relationship between Quark-Meson Coupling Model and Quantum Hadrodynamics_, Prog. Theor. Phys. 108 (2002) 609-614 ([arXiv:nucl-th/0207053](https://arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/0207053))



[[!include Skyrme hadrodynamics with vector mesons -- references ]]


[[!include Skyrme hadrodynamics with heavy mesons -- references]]


[[!include WZW term of QCD chiral perturbation theory -- references]]


[[!include baryon chiral perturbation theory -- references]]








