
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
#### $(\infty,1)$-Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include (infinity,1)-topos - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The notion of _étale homotopy_ can be understood as a vast generalization of the following classical fact.

The [[nerve theorem]] says that for $X$ a [[paracompact topological space]] and $\{U_i \to X\}$ a [[good cover]] of $X$ by open subsets, then the [[simplicial set]] obtained from the [[Cech nerve]] of the covering by degreewise contracting all connected components to a point, presents the [[homotopy type]] of $X$.

If $X$ here is more generally a [[locally contractible space]] there is in general no notion of "good" enough open cover anymore. Instead, one can consider the above kind of construction for _all_ [[hypercovers]] and take the [[limit]] over the resulting simplicial sets. The classical theorem by [Artin-Mazur](#ArtinMazur) states that this still gives the [[homotopy type]] of $X$.

The construction itself, however, makes sense for arbitrary topological spaces and in fact for arbitrary [[sites]]. 

In the literature, particularly the _[[étale site]]_ is often considered and "étale homotopy" is often implicitly understood to take place over this site. 

But the concept is much more general. In particular, one can understand the construction of the limit over contractions of [[hypercovers]] as a presentation of naturally defined [[(∞,1)-functors]] in [[(∞,1)-topos theory]]. 

Notably, if the given site is a a [[locally ∞-connected site]], then the étale homotopy construction computes precisely the [[derived functor]] that presents the [[fundamental ∞-groupoid in a locally ∞-connected (∞,1)-topos]]. Many constructions in the literature can be understood as being explicit realizations of this simple general concept. Detailed discussion of this is at _[[geometric homotopy groups in an (∞,1)-topos]]_.

Even more generally, étale homotopy give the notion of [[shape of an (∞,1)-topos]]. (...)

## Related concepts

* [[algebraic fundamental group]]

* [[anabelian geometry]]

## References

* [[Michael Artin]], [[Barry Mazur]], _&Eacute;tale Homotopy_, Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics 100, Berlin (1969)  
  {#ArtinMazur}


*  E. M. Friedlander, _Fibrations in étale homotopy theory [(numdam)](http://archive.numdam.org/ARCHIVE/PMIHES/PMIHES_1973__42_/PMIHES_1973__42__5_0/PMIHES_1973__42__5_0.pdf)_, Publ. Math. 
Inst. des Haut. Études Scient., 42, (1973), 5 – 46.



* [[Eric Friedlander]], 1982, _Étale homotopy of simplicial schemes_ , volume 104 of Annals of Mathematics Studies , Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J. 

* [[Tomer Schlank]], [[Alexei Skorobogatov]], _A very brief introduction to étale homotopy_. In: “Torsors, étale homotopy and applications to rational points”. LMS Lecture Note Series 405, Cambridge University Press, 2013. ([pdf](http://www2.imperial.ac.uk/~anskor/SCHLANK-SKOROBOGATOV.pdf))


[[!redirects étale homotopy theory]]

[[!redirects etale homotopy]]
[[!redirects etale homotopy theory]]

[[!redirects etale homotopy group]]
[[!redirects étale homotopy group]]
[[!redirects etale homotopy groups]]
[[!redirects étale homotopy groups]]

[[!redirects étale fundamental group]]
[[!redirects étale fundamental groups]]
