
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition 

Given a [[monoidal category]] $M$, let $Coalg(M)$ denote the category of coalgebras (i.e., [[comonoid|comonoids]]) with respect to the [[tensor product]] of $M$. Let $U \colon Coalg(M) \to M$ be the [[forgetful functor]]. The **cofree coalgebra** refers to a functor _[[right adjoint|right]]_ [[adjoint functor|adjoint]] to $U$, if it exists. 

## Examples

For example, a cofree coalgebra on a [[vector space]] $V$ consists of a coalgebra $C(V)$ and a [[linear map]] $\varepsilon \colon C(V) \to V$ which is [[universal construction|universal]] in the sense that given a coalgebra $C$ and linear map $f \colon C \to V$, there exists a unique coalgebra map $g \colon C \to C(V)$ such that $f = \varepsilon \circ g$. 

## Constructions 

The forgetful functor $U \colon Coalg(M) \to M$ [[preserved colimit|preserves]] and [[reflected colimit|reflects]] (creates) any [[colimits]] which happen to exist, analogous to the fact that the forgetful functor $Alg(M) \to M$ preserves and reflects [[limits]]. Therefore, under hypotheses of an [[adjoint functor theorem]] (which almost always obtain in cases of practical interest), $U$ will indeed have a right adjoint. 

Better yet, by working closely through the details of an adjoint functor theorem, one may eventually arrive at an explicit construction. In what follows, we give an explicit construction of the cofree coalgebra cogenerated by a vector space. It remains to be seen whether this is the same as that described in a MathOverflow discussion [here](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/31109/is-there-an-explicit-construction-of-a-free-coalgebra/31126#31126); I ([[Todd Trimble]]) have some doubts.

As a first step, recall the following result. 

+-- {: .num_thm}
###### Fundamental theorem of coalgebras 
Every coalgebra is the filtered colimit over the diagram of its finite-dimensional subcoalgebras and inclusions between them. 
=-- 

For a proof of this result, see for example [Michaelis](WM). We repeat that colimits of coalgebras are created by taking colimits of their underlying vector spaces. 

Let for a vector space $V$, let $T(V)$ be the [[tensor algebra]] (or free algebra) generated by $V$. We may consider $T(V^\ast)$ the algebra of (non-commutative) polynomial functions on $V$. The dual of $T(V^\ast)$ is not a coalgebra, but in accordance with the fundamental theorem above, we may consider instead the colimit over a system of finite-dimensional coalgebras obtained by dualizing the system of finite-dimensional algebra quotients of $T(V^\ast)$ and surjections between them (compare [[profinite completion]], using the fact that the dual of a finite-dimensional algebra is a finite-dimensional coalgebra. Let $T(V^\ast)^\circ$ be this colimit coalgebra, embedded in $T(V^\ast)^\ast$. The dual of the inclusion $V^\ast \hookrightarrow T(V^\ast)$ gives a map $T(V^\ast)^\ast \to V^{\ast \ast}$, and this restricts to a map $T(V^\ast)^\circ \to V^{\ast \ast}$. 

For finite-dimensional $V$, there is an isomorphism $V^{\ast \ast} \cong V$, and we have the following result. 

+-- {: .num_lem}
######Lemma 
If $V$ is finite-dimensional, then the composite $T(V^\ast)^\circ \to V^{\ast \ast} \cong V$ exhibits $T(V^\ast)^\circ$ as the cofree coalgebra on $V$. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof}
######Proof 
Suppose given a coalgebra $C$ and a linear map $f \colon C \to V$. We want to show this has a unique lift to a coalgebra map $\widehat{f} \colon C \to T(V^\ast)^\circ$. For $x \in C$, there is a minimal finite-dimensional subcoalgebra $C_x$ containing $x$, and if $f_x \colon C_x \to T(V^\ast)^\circ$ is the restriction of $f$, then the value $\widehat{f}(x)$ must match the value $\widehat{f_x}(x)$. In other words, in view of the fundamental theorem of coalgebras, there is no loss of generality in taking $C$ to be finite-dimensional. 

In this case, the map $f^\ast \colon V^\ast \to C^\ast$ extends uniquely to an algebra map $T(V^\ast) \to C^\ast$, since the tensor algebra is the free algebra on $V$. This algebra map factors as 

$$T(V^\ast) \stackrel{onto}{\to} Q \stackrel{into}{\to} C^\ast$$ 

where $Q$ is a finite-dimensional algebra. The dual $Q^\ast$ carries a coalgebra structure that embeds in $T(V^\ast)^\circ$, and by dualizing we obtain coalgebra maps 

$$C \to Q^\ast \to T(V^\ast)^\circ$$ 

that provide the desired lift. The uniqueness of the lift is evident from the uniqueness of the extension $T(V^\ast) \to C$ (or equivalently, of $T(V^\ast)_{prof} \to C$, passing to the profinite completion) on the dual algebra side. 
=-- 

Now let $V$ be an infinite-dimensional vector space. We may view $V$ as the union or filtered colimit over the system $\{V_\alpha\}$ of its finite-dimensional subspaces. Applying the cofree coalgebra construction to these finite-dimensional subspaces, we get a system of coalgebras, and we claim that the coalgebra colimit 

$$K = colim_{V_\alpha \subset V} C(V_\alpha)$$ 

is the cofree coalgebra on $V$. Indeed, suppose given a coalgebra $C$ and a linear function $f \colon C \to V$. To construct a coalgebra map $C \to K$ which lifts $f$, we may argue just as we did in the proof of the lemma, and suppose without loss of generality that $C$ is finite-dimensional. Then of course the map $f \colon C \to V$ factors through a map $f_\alpha \colon C \to V_\alpha$ where $V_\alpha$ is a finite-dimensional subspace of $V$. This lifts uniquely to a coalgebra map $\widehat{f_\alpha} \colon C(V_\alpha)$, and the desired $\widehat{f}$ is the composite 

$$C \stackrel{\widehat{f_\alpha}}{\to} C(V_\alpha) \hookrightarrow K$$

Any such lift is obtained in just this way. 

Thus, we have a description of the cofree coalgebra $C(V)$ on a vector space. The following purports to be an equivalent description. 

+-- {: .num_thm}
######Claim  
The universal arrow $C(V) \to V$ is the pullback (in $Vect$) of the arrow $T(V^\ast)^\circ \to V^{\ast \ast}$ along the canonical inclusion $V \hookrightarrow V^{\ast \ast}$. 
=-- 

For this to be true, one must check that the vector space inclusion $C(V) \hookrightarrow T(V^\ast)^\circ$, obtained from the pullback, realizes $C(V)$ as a subcoalgebra of $T(V^\ast)^\circ$. 

## Related concepts

* The [[duality|dual concepts]] are the of _[[free monoid]]_, and _[[tensor algebra]]_,

## References 

Walter Michaelis, _Coassociative Coalgebras_, Handbook of Algebra Volume 3, Elsevier (2003). 
{#WM} 

[[!redirects cofree coalgebras]]