
In [[measure theory]], an __almost-everywhere-defined function__, or __almost function__, is a [[partial function]] whose domain is a [[full set]].  We are usually only interested in *[[measurable function|measurable]]* almost functions.  Typically, we consider almost functions up to the [[equivalence relation]] of almost equality, whereby two almost functions are __[[almost equality|almost equal]]__ if their [[equaliser]] is also a full set, that is if they are equal almost everywhere.

As we need to know what a full set is, there is no notion of almost function on an arbitrary classical [[measurable space]].  However, if the measurable space is equipped with such a notion (as is always the case with a [[Cheng measurable space]] or a [[localisable measurable space]]), then we have almost functions.  Of course, a [[measure space]] also has plenty of structure for this.  The morphisms between [[measurable locales]] also inherently correspond to measurable almost functions (up to almost equality).

It is a commonplace that one really only cares about measurable functions up to almost equality.  That one only needs measurable functions to be defined almost everywhere is the same idea.  However, in [[classical mathematics]], every almost function may be extended (using [[excluded middle]]) to an actual (everywhere-defined) [[function]], and this extension is unique up to almost equality.  Accordingly, the notion of almost function is only necessary in [[constructive mathematics]].  However, even classically, using them from the start can avoid annoying but trivial technicalities.

Besides measure theory, the concept applies whenever we have a notion of something being true (in this case, that a partial function is defined) [[almost everywhere]].


[[!redirects almost function]]
[[!redirects almost functions]]
[[!redirects almost-everywhere-defined function]]
[[!redirects almost-everywhere-defined functions]]
