A binary [[relation]] from a [[set]] $X$ to a set $Y$ is called **entire** if every element of $X$ is related to at least one element of $Y$.  Notice that this is the same thing as the pre-Bourbaki literature calls a (total) **multi-valued function** (although that term usually implied some continuity or analyticity properties as well).  An entire relation is sometimes called **total**, although that has another meaning in the theory of [[poset|partial order]]s.

A [[function]] is precisely a relation that is both entire and [[functional relation|functional]].

Like any relation, an entire relation $r$ can be viewed as a [[span]]
$$ \array {
  &                  & \Gamma_r \\
  & \swarrow_{\pi_r} &          & \searrow^{\phi_r} \\
X &                  &          &                   & Y
} $$
Such a span is a relation iff the pairing map from the **graph** $\Gamma_r$ to $X \times Y$ is an [[injection]], and such a relation is entire iff the **projection** map $\pi_r$ is a [[surjection]].

The [[axiom of choice]] says precisely that every entire relation contains a [[function]].  Failing that, the [[COSHEP]] axiom may be interpreted to say that, given $X$, there is a single surjection $\pi_X: \Gamma_X \to X$ such that every entire relation from $X$ contains a relation given by a span whose left leg is $\pi_X$.  In any case, entire relations may be preferable to functions in some contexts where the axiom of choice fails.

[[anafunctor|Anafunctor]]s may be seen as a [[vertical categorification|categorification]] of entire relations (although anafunctors are still functional on morphisms).  In particular, if one thinks of sets as [[discrete category|discrete categories]], then an entire relation is precisely a saturated anafunctor between sets.

+--{.query}
_Mike_: I don't believe that last sentence.  (Ana)functoriality on morphisms will imply that your relation is also [[functional relation|functional]].

I also disagree that anafunctors are a categorification of entire relations, precisely for this reason.  I would say instead that anafunctors are a categorification of entire _and_ functional relations.  It's a convenient coincidence that in the 1-dimensional case, every anafunctor is already a functor without the need for choice.  But note that when you construct, say, the [[regular category|regular]] or [[exact category|exact completion]] of a category $C$ (as you do when constructing the [[effective topos]]), you take its objects to be certain [[equivalence relation]]s in $C$, and you need to take the morphisms to be relations in $C$ that are entire and functional with respect to the given equivalence relations&mdash;which doesn't imply that they're actually given by morphisms in $C$ itself.

=--

When [[internalization|internalising]] entire relations to a [[site]], one may want to replace the projection map $\pi_r: \Gamma_r \to X$ by a [[cover|covering family]].
