+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* the following line creates the automatic table of contents
{: toc}


## Idea ##

Similarly to the presentation of groups by generators and relations, a
category may be presented by a set of generating arrows subject to
certain relations.

## Definition ##

Let $G$ be a [[quiver|directed graph]], and let $R$ be a function that assigns to each pair $a,b$ of objects of the free category $F(G)$ a binary
relation $R_{a,b}$ on the hom-set $F(G)(a,b)$.  The
**category with generators $G$ and relations $R$** is the quotient
category (as defined in [Mac Lane](#MacLane) or [Mitchell](#Mitchel), for example - this is _not_ the nLab definition) $F(G)/R$. For a category $C$, an isomorphism $C\to F(G)/R$ is called a **presentation** of $C$.

## Properties ##

Writing $can\colon F(G)\to F(G)/R$ for the canonical functor, it follows
from the universal property of the quotient category that for any
functor $S\colon F(G)\to D$ that respects the relation $R$ ($f
R_{a,b}g$ implies $S(f)=S(g)$), there exists a unique functor $S'\colon
F(G)/R\to D$ with $S = S'\circ can$.

## Examples ##

1. Every category $C$ has a presentation by generators and relations:
Take $G$ as the underlying graph of $C$, and for objects $a$, $b$,
let $R_{a,b}$ be the relation on $F(G)(a,b)$ consisting of all pairs
of paths from $a$ to $b$ in $G$ whose arrows have the same composition
in $C$. However, there are sometimes more economical presentations for a
category, as the following example shows.

1. The augmented simplex category $\Delta_a$ is generated by the face
maps and the degeneracy maps, subject to the simplicial relations (see
[[simplex category]] for details).  The existence of a functor from the
quotient category to $\Delta_a$ follows from the fact that the arrows of
$\Delta_a$ do satisfy the simplicial relations, and the fact that this
functor is an isomorphism may be verified using the unique
decomposition of an arrow of $\Delta_a$ as the composition of
degeneracies of decreasing index followed by the composition of face
maps of increasing index (see the lemma on p. 177 of [Mac Lane](#MacLane)). Similarly, the subcategory $(\Delta_a)_{inj}$ consisting of all monics (injective monotone functions in our case) is generated by the face maps subject to the single simplicial relation involving only face maps.

References

* pp. 51-52 of [[Categories Work|Categories for the Working Mathematician]] 
{#MacLane}

* pp. 108-112 of B. Mitchell, _Introduction to Category Theory and
Homological Algebra_, in P. Salmon (Ed.), _Categories and Commutative
Algebra_.  Springer, 2010. 
{#Mitchel}