
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Higher algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _model structure for dendroidal complete Segal spaces_ is an [[operad|operadic]] generalization of the [[model structure for complete Segal spaces]]. It serves to [[presentable (∞,1)-category|present]] the [[(∞,1)-category]] of [[(∞,1)-operads]].

## Definition

Write $\Omega$ for the [[tree category]], the site for [[dendroidal sets]]

$$
  dSet := [\Omega^{op}, Set]
  \,.
$$

Write $\otimes$ for the [[Boardman-Vogt tensor product]] on [[dendroidal sets]] (see there for details).


### Segal core

+-- {: .num_defn #SegalCore}
###### Definition

For $T \in \Omega$, write $Sc[T] \hookrightarrow \Omega[T]$ for the [[subobject]] of [[dendroidal sets]] consisting of all the subtree corolla inclusions.

Call this the **Segal core** of $T$.

=--

See ([Cisinski-Moerdijk, section 2](#CisinskiMoerdijk)).

### The model structure


+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

Let $dsSet_{gReedy} := [\Omega^{op}, sSet]$ be the category of [[dendroidal set|dendroidal]] [[simplicial sets]], equipped with the [[generalized Reedy model structure]] induced from the [[generalized Reedy category]] $\Omega$.

Write 

$$
  dsSet_{Segal}
  \stackrel{\leftarrow}{\to}
  dsSet_{Reedy}
$$ 

for the [[Bousfield localization of model categories|left Bousfield localization]] at the set of Segal core inclusions $\{Sc[R] \to \Omega[T]\}_{T \in \Omega}$, def. \ref{SegalCore}, to be called the **model structure for dendroidal Segal spaces**. A fibrant object in this category is called a **dendroidal Segal space**.

Write 

$$
  dsSet_{cSegal}
  \stackrel{\leftarrow}{\to}
  dsSet_{Segal}
$$ 

for the further left Bousfield localization at the set of morphisms 
$\{\Omega[T]\otimes (J_d \to \eta) \}_{T \in \Omega, }$, where $J_d$ is the _dendroidal interval_

$$
  J_d := 
  i_!(N(\tau(\Delta[1])))
  \,.
$$

Call this the **model structure for complete dendroidal Segal spaces**. A fibrant object in here is called a **complete dendroidal Segal space**.

=--

This is [Cisinski-Moerdijk, def. 5.4, def. 6.2](#CisinskiMoerdijk).

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The first localization at the Segal core inclusions is equivalently the [[Bousfield localization of model categories|left Bousfield localization]] at the set of dendroidal inner horn inclusions.

=--

This is [Cisinski-Moerdijk, prop. 5.5, def. 6.2](#CisinskiMoerdijk).

## Properties


### Relation to other model structures

We discuss the relation to various other model structures for operads. For an overview see _[[table - models for (infinity,1)-operads]]_.


#### To complete Segal spaces

(...) [[model structure for complete Segal spaces]]

#### To dendroidal sets

(...)

#### To Segal operads

(...) [[model structure for Segal operads]]


## References

The model structure for dendroidal complete Segal spaces was introduced in 

* [[Denis-Charles Cisinski]], [[Ieke Moerdijk]], _Dendroidal Segal spaces and infinity-operads_ ([arXiv:1010.4956](http://arxiv.org/abs/1010.4956))
 {#CisinskiMoerdijk}
