
# Child's drawing (Dessin d'enfant)
* automatic table of contents goes here
{: toc}

## Idea and prehistory

It is an old result that any (finite) [[graph]] can be embedded in an orientable surface. (The result can be found, for instance in
Arthur T. White's book (see below): 1984 _Graphs, groups and surfaces_, in which he give an algorithm, calling it the Edmonds algorithm and giving a date of 1960, (see references).)

In 1879 Felix Klein ([Klein's dessins d'enfants](#KleinsDessins)) in his paper ''Über die Transformationen elfter Ordnung der elliptischen Funktionen'' (''On the transformations of order eleven of elliptic functions'' ) classified some Riemann surfaces of a certain ramification type by associating to covers of the surface with certain [[monodromy]] group their ''dessin's denfants'' which he called ''Linienzüge''.

The modern perception of dessin's d'enfants begins with [[Grothendieck]], who showed how to describe, categorically, the geometric structure corresponding to such embedded graphs, namely by the action of a certain 'cartographic group' on sets.  His motivation was the way in which this shed light on the structure of Riemann surfaces, and through that to the [[absolute Galois group]] $G$ of the rational numbers. The technical vehicle explicating this relation is Belyi's theorem from which follows that $G$ has a faithful [[action]] on Grothendieck's dessin's d'enfants.


>A _dessin d'enfant_ (French for a "child's drawing", plural ''dessins d'enfants'', "children's drawings") is a type of [[graph]] drawing used to study [[Riemann surface]]s and to provide combinatorial [[Invariant (mathematics)|invariants]] for the action of the [[absolute Galois group]] of the [[rational number]]s.

>''Intuitively, a dessin d'enfant is simply a [[undirected graph|graph]], with its [[vertex (graph theory)|vertices]] colored alternating black and white, [[graph embedding|embedded]] onto an [[Orientability|oriented surface]] that, in many cases, is simply a [[plane]]. For the coloring to exist, the graph must be [[bipartite graph|bipartite]]. The faces of the embedding must be topological disks. The surface and the embedding may be described combinatorially using a [[rotation system]], a [[cyclic order]] of the edges surrounding each vertex of the graph that describes the order in which the edges would be crossed by a path that travels clockwise on the surface in a small loop around the vertex. Any dessin can provide the surface it is embedded on with a structure as a Riemann surface. It natural to ask which Riemann surfaces arise in this way. The answer is provided by [[Belyi's theorem]], which states that these are precisely those that can be defined over the field of algebraic numbers (when considered as algebraic curves). The absolute Galois group transforms these particular curves into each other, and thereby also transforms the underlying dessins.'' (wikipedia)


+-- {:.un_defn}
## Definition

A _dessin d’enfant_ is a bipartite connected graph $G$ which is 
embedded into an orientable closed topological surface $X$, such that it ﬁlls the 
surface, i.e. $X \setminus G$ is a union of open cells. Two dessins d’enfants $(X_1 , G_1 )$ and $(X_2 , G_2 )$ are called _equivalent_ if there exists a homeomorphism $f : X_1 \to X_2$ 
such that $f (G_1 ) = G_2$ .

=--


## Example

* An example for a bipartite (connected) graph is a [[tree category|tree]].

* It is well known that the bipartite graph $K_{3,3}$ is non-planar, so does not embed in the 2-sphere, but will embed in the torus, in such a way that its complement is a disjoint union of discs.


## A translated extract 

(from the [[Esquisse d'un programme]] describing the idea as seen by Grothendieck:)


''My interest in topological surfaces began to appear in 1974, when I proposed to Yves Ladegaillerie the theme of the isotopic study of embeddings 
of a topological 1-complex into a compact surface. Over the two following 
years, this study led him to a remarkable isotopy theorem, giving a complete algebraic description of the isotopy classes of embeddings of such 
1-complexes, or compact surfaces with boundary, in a compact oriented 
surface, in terms of certain very simple combinatorial invariants, and the 
fundamental groups of the protagonists. This theorem, which should be 
easily generalisable to embeddings of any compact space (triangulable to 
simplify) in a compact oriented surface, gives as easy corollaries several 
deep classical results in the theory of surfaces, and in particular Baer’s isotopy theorem. 

 In the work of Ladegaillerie there is also a purely algebraic description, in terms 
of fundamental groups, of the ''isotopic” category of compact surfaces X , 
equipped with a topological 1-complex K embedded in X . This description, 
which had the misfortune to run counter to ''today’s taste” and because of 
this appears to be unpublishable, nevertheless served (and still serves) as a 
precious guide in my later reflections, particularly in the context of absolute 
algebraic geometry in characteristic zero. ''


## References

Fairly elementary sources for background material include:
 
* Arthur T. White: 1984 _Graphs, groups and surfaces_
 which gives the Edmonds algorithm for the embedding. the original source for that is:

* J. Edmonds (1960), A combinatorial representation for polyhedral surfaces, Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 7, 646.

References on the deeper theory as developed by Grothendieck and his students, and including summaries of subsequent work,  include:

*  [[L. Schneps]], ed., 1994, The Grothendieck theory of dessins d’enfants , 
volume 200 of London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series , Cam- 
bridge University Press, Cambridge, papers from the Conference on 
Dessins d’Enfant held in Luminy, April 19–24, 1993


* Marco Robalo, _Galois Theory towards Dessins d'Enfants_ ([pdf](https://dspace.ist.utl.pt/bitstream/2295/575330/1/dissertacao.pdf))

*  F. Herrlich, G. Schmithüsen: [Dessins d’enfants and Origami curves](http://www.math.kit.edu/iag3/~schmithuesen/media/dessins.pdf)

The Wikipedia page on this is:

* [wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dessin_d'enfant)

References on the history of dessins d'enfants

* Lieven Le Bruyn, Klein’s dessins d’enfant and the buckyball, 2008. [web](http://www.neverendingbooks.org/index.php/kleins-dessins-denfant-and-the-buckyball.html){#KleinsDessins}


[[!redirects child's drawing]]
[[!redirects child's drawings]]
[[!redirects children's drawing]]
[[!redirects children's drawings]]
[[!redirects dessin d'enfant]]
[[!redirects dessins d'enfant]]
[[!redirects dessin d'enfants]]
[[!redirects dessins d'enfants]]
[[!redirects dessin d’enfant]]
[[!redirects dessins d’enfant]]
[[!redirects dessin d’enfants]]
[[!redirects dessins d’enfants]]
