
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Model category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include model category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

An **elegant Reedy category** is a [[Reedy category]] $R$ such that the following *equivalent* conditions hold

* For every [[monomorphism]] $A\hookrightarrow B$ of [[presheaves]] on $R$ and every $x\in R$, the induced map $A_x \amalg_{L_x A} L_x B \to B_x$ is a monomorphism.

* Every [[span]] of codegeneracy maps in $R$ has an [[absolute colimit|absolute]] [[pushout]] in $R$ that also consists of codegeneracy maps.

* Both the following conditions hold:

  1. For every monomorphism $A\hookrightarrow B$ of presheaves on $R$, every nondegenerate element of $A$ remains nondegenerate in $B$.

  1. Every element of a presheaf $R$ is a degeneracy of some nondegenerate element in a unique way.

=--

In particular, if $R$ is elegant, then every codegeneracy map is a [[split epimorphism]].

## Properties

### Model structures

+-- {: .num_theorem}
###### Theorem

If $R$ is an elegant Reedy category and $M$ is a [[model category]] in which the [[cofibrations]] are exactly the [[monomorphisms]], then the [[Reedy model structure]] and the [[injective model structure]] on $M^{R^{op}}$ coincide.

=--

In particular, this implies that every $M$-valued presheaf on an elegant Reedy category is Reedy cofibrant.


## Examples

* The [[simplex category]] $\Delta$ is an elegant Reedy category.

* Joyal's [[Theta category|disk categories]] $\Theta_n$ are elegant Reedy categories.

* Every [[direct category]] is a Reedy category with no degeneracies, hence trivially an elegant one.

* If $X$ is any presheaf on an elegant Reedy category $R$, then the opposite of its [[category of elements]] $(el X)^{op}$ is again an elegant Reedy category.  This is fairly easy to see from the fact that $Set^{el X}$ is equivalent to the slice category $Set^{R^{op}}/X$.

Note that unlike the notion of [[Reedy category]], the notion of elegant Reedy category is not self-dual: if $R$ is elegant then $R^{op}$ will not generally be elegant.

## Related concepts

* [[generalized Reedy category]]

* [[Reedy model structure]]


## References

* [[Julie Bergner]] and [[Charles Rezk]], *Reedy categories and the $\Theta$-construction*, [arXiv:1110.1066](http://arxiv.org/abs/1110.1066)

[[!redirects elegant Reedy categories]]
