
{:myproof: .proof style="margin-left:2em;"}
{:mynumdef: .num_defn style="border:solid #cccccc;border-width:2px 1px;padding:0 1em;margin:0 1em;"}
{:goal: .un_remark style="border:solid #0000cc;background: #add8e6;border-width:2px 1px;padding:0 1em;margin:0 1em;"}

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


# Schedules
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea
{#idea}

Let $X$ be a [[topological space]] and $\mathcal{U}$ an [[open cover]] thereof.  A ([[continuous function|continuous]]) path $\gamma \colon I \to X$ can pass through many of the elements of $\mathcal{U}$ as it winds its way around $X$.  We can decompose that path into segments such that each segment lies wholly inside one of the [[open sets]] in $\mathcal{U}$.  The **Schedule Theorem** says that this can be done continuously over all paths in $X$.

This was proved by [Dyer and Eilenberg](#DyerEilenberg) and applied to the question of fibrations over numerable spaces.

## Schedules
{#schedules}

The idea of a schedule is that it is a way of decomposing a length into pieces and then assigning a label to each piece.  This clearly fits with the stated purpose of these things since we wish to decompose a path into pieces and assign an open set to each piece.

To make this precise, we start with a set of labels.  Following Dyer and Eilenberg, let us write this as $A$.  Lengths are positive [[real numbers]] and so we also need the set of such, Dyer and Eilenberg denote this by $T$; thus $T \coloneqq \mathbb{R}_{\ge 0}$.

+-- {: .num_defn #schmon}
###### Definition
The **schedule monoid** of $A$ is the [[free monoid]] on the [[set]] $A \times T$.  It is written $S A$.  Its elements are **schedules** in $A$.
=--

A schedule in $A$ is thus a finite [[order|ordered]] list of pairs $(a,t)$ where $a \in A$ and $t \in T$.

There are two notions of *length* for a schedule.  There is the *word length* which simply counts the number of pairs.  Then there is the function $l \colon S A \to T$ defined by $l((a_1,t_1) \cdots (a_k,t_k)) = t_1 + \cdots + t_k$.  There is also a right action of $T$ on $S A$ which simply multiplies all of the lengths: $((a_1,t_1) \cdots (a_k,t_k)) \cdot t = ((a_1,t_1 t) \cdots (a_k,t_k t))$.  Then $l(s t) = l(s) t$.

+-- {: .num_defn #reduced}
###### Definition
A schedule is said to be **reduced** if all of its terms, $(a,t)$, has non-zero length, i.e. $t \gt 0$.  The set of reduced schedules forms a submonoid of $S A$ which is written $R S A$.
=--

The empty schedule is reduced.

There is a [[retraction]] map $\rho \colon S A \to R S A$ defined by removing all terms with zero length part.

The schedule monoid is given a [[topology]] so that the labels are discrete and the lengths topologised as usual.  More concretely, given a word $a_1 a_2 \dots a_k$ of elements in $A$, the set of schedules of the form $(a_1,t_1) (a_2,t_2) \cdots (a_k,t_k)$ is in bijection with $T^k$ and we make that bijection a homeomorphism.  Then $S A$ is topologised by taking the coproduct over the set of words in $A$.  The reduced schedule monoid is topologised as the quotient of this.

## Paths
{#paths}

Let $X$ be a [[topological space]].  Let $P X$ denotes its [[Moore path space]].  Suppose that we have a family $\mathcal{U}$ of subsets of $X$ indexed by some set $A$.  Then we consider a schedule in $A$ as giving an ordered list of these subsets together with the times to be spent in each.  For a path in $X$, and a schedule of the appropriate length, then we can ask whether or not the path *fits* (or obeys) the schedule.  We make that precise as follows.

+-- {: .num_defn #fits}
###### Definition
Suppose that we have $\alpha \in P X$ and $s \in S A$, and suppose that $s = (a_1, t_1) \cdots (a_k,t_k)$.  Then we say that $\alpha$ **fits the schedule** s, written $\alpha \Vert s$, if:

1. $l(alpha) = l(s)$
2. Split $\alpha$ into subpaths according to the times $\{t_i\}$.  Let $\alpha_i$ be the $i$th segment.  Then $\alpha_i \in P U_{a_i}$.
=--

Here, $l \colon P X \to T$ is the function that assigns to a Moore path its length.


## Schedule Theorem
{#secschthm}

We can now state the main theorem.

+-- {: .num_theorem #schthm}
###### Theorem
Let $X$ be a [[topological space]].  Let $\mathcal{U}$ be a [[locally finite cover|locally finite]] [[open covering]] of $X$ by [[numerable]] open sets with indexing set $A$.  Then there is a [[local covering]] $\mathcal{F}$ of $P X$ and a family of [[continuous functions]] $f \colon F \to S A$, indexed by $F \in \mathcal{F}$ such that:

1. for each $\alpha \in F$, $\alpha \Vert f_F(\alpha)$, and
2. for each $\alpha \in F \cap F'$, $\rho(f_F(\alpha)) = \rho(f_{F'}(\alpha))$
=--

+-- {: .num_corollary #schcor}
###### Corollary
There exists a [[continuous function]] $h \colon P X \to R S A$ such that $\alpha \Vert h(\alpha)$ if $l(\alpha) \gt 0$ and $h(\alpha) = \Lambda$ if $l(\alpha) = 0$.
=--

Here, $\Lambda \in R S A$ is the empty word.

## References
{#refs}

* {#MR0963792} Dyer, E. and E., Samuel. (1988). Globalizing fibrations by schedules. _Fund. Math._, _130_, 125&ndash;136. [MR0963792](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=963792)

* Dyer, Eilenberg, MR0963792
 {#DyerEilenberg}

[[!redirects schedules]]

[[!redirects schedule theorem]]
