# Frequently Asked Questions

Also including questions that should be frequently asked but aren't.

### Instiki "features"

1. *My reference cites the wrong theorem*

    If you want to use references with numbered theorems and the like then there has to be a reference for _every_ numbered theorem.
    Specifically, if you want to reference a particular theorem then every previous numbered theorem has to have a label otherwise the counters are not syncronised.
    (This is apparently a _feature_, not a _bug_.
    It is a necessary consequence of being able to easily add new theorem-like environments via CSS.)

+--{: .query}
How seriously are you claiming this to be a feature rather than a bug?  If it's a necessary consequence of something-or-other, that's one thing, and it's not too hard to work around.  But calling it a feature implies that there are reasons one might _want_ this specific behavior, and I'm having trouble thinking of those.
=--

### _n_-Lab Specifics

1.  *Why did my page get redirected?*

    Did you read the _Naming Conventions_ section on the HowTo?

1.  *Where do I ask a question?*

    How many times have you wanted to ask it?  If more than three times, put it here (*joke*!).

    Seriously, if about a specific page then put it on that page in a query block:

        +-- {: .query}
        How do I prove the Riemannian Hypothesis?
        =--

    If about the _n_-Lab then try the [n-Forum](http://www.math.ntnu.no/~stacey/Vanilla/nForum).
    If about something mathematical then try to convince [[John Baez|John]], [[Urs Schreiber|Urs]], or [[David Corfield|David]] to start a blog entry on the _n_-Category Caf&eacute; about it.

category:meta