
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}


## Definition

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a [[category]] with [[pullbacks]].

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A [[simplicial object]] 

$$
  X : \Delta^{op} \to \mathcal{C}$ 
$$

is said to satisfy the **Segal conditions** if it sends the [[colimits]] in the [[simplex category]] to [[limits]], hence if 

$$
  X_n 
   \simeq 
  X_1 \times_{X_0} \cdots \times_{X_0} X_1
$$

for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$.

=--

More in detail:

+-- {: .num_defn #SegalCones}
###### Definition

For all $n \in \mathbb{N}$, consider $\Delta[n]$ as a [[cocone]] in the [[simplex category]] under the [[diagram]]

$$
  \array{
     \Delta[0] && && \Delta[0] && && \Delta[0] &&& \cdots
      \\
      & {}_{\mathllap{d_1}}\searrow_{\mathrlap{d_0}} && {}_{\mathllap{d_0}}\swarrow && \searrow_{\mathrlap{d_0}} && \swarrow && \cdots
      \\
      && \Delta[1] &&&& \Delta[1] && \cdots 
  }
$$

with $n$ copies of $\Delta[1]$ at the bottom. 

A [[simplicial object]] $X \colon \Delta^{op} \to \mathcal{C}$ satisfies the Segal conditions if it sends these cocones to [[limit]] [[cones]] in $\mathcal{C}$.

=--


## Properties

### Characterization of nerves of categories

+-- {: .num_theorem #NerveTheorem}
###### Theorem
**(nerve theorem)**

A [[simplicial set]] is the [[nerve]] of a [[small category]] precisely if it satsfies the Segal conditions.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

There is an entirely unrelated theorem in [[homotopy theory]] also often called "the" _[[nerve theorem]]_. See there for more. Not to be confused with the discussion here.

=--

### In terms of sheaf conditions

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The condition in def. \ref{SegalCones} superficially looks like a [[sheaf]] condition for [[coverings]] of $\Delta[n]$ by $n$ subsequent copies of $\Delta[1]$. However, these coverings do not form a [[coverage]] on the [[simplex category]] $\Delta$: the refinement-of-covers-axiom is not satisfied:

For instance for $d_1 \colon \Delta[1] \to \Delta[2]$ the map that sends the single edge of $\Delta[1]$ to the composite edge in $\Delta[2]$ there is no way to "pull back" the cover $\{\Delta[1] \coprod \Delta[1] \to \Delta[2]\}$ along this morphism, not even in the weak sense of _[[coverage]]_.

However, as this example also makes clear, the problem is precisely only with the morphisms in $\Delta$ that are no injective on generating edges.

=--

Therefore consider instead the following:

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

Let $\Delta_0 \hookrightarrow Graph$ be the [[full subcategory]] of that of [[directed graphs]] on the linear graphs $\{0 \to 1 \to \cdots \to n\}$ for $n \in \mathbb{N}$. 

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

Morphisms in $\Delta_0$ have to send elementary edges to elementary edges. For instance there are precisely $n$ morphisms $\Delta_0[1] \to \Delta_0[n]$.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Taking the cocones of def. \ref{SegalCones} as [[coverings]] constitutes a [[coverage]] on $\Delta_0$. 

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

A [[presheaf]] $X \colon \Delta_0^{op} \to \mathcal{C}$ is a [[sheaf]] with respect to this coverage precisely if it is in the essential image of the moprhism

$$
  Graph(\mathcal{C})
  \coloneqq
  \mathcal{C}^{(1 \stackrel{\to}{\to} 0)} \to \mathcal{C}^{\Delta_0^{op}}
$$

which sends a [[directed graph]] $E \stackrel{\overset{t}{\to}}{\underset{s}{\to} }V$ to the [[presheaf]] which sends $\Delta[2]$ to $E {}_t\times{}_s E$, etc.

Hence we have an [[equivalence of categories]]

$$
  Graph(\mathcal{C})
  \simeq
  Sh(\Delta_0)
  \,.
$$

=--

In terms of this theorem \ref{NerveTheorem} says the following:

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The [[commuting diagram]] of [[1-categories]]

$$
  \array{
    Cat &\stackrel{N}{\to}& PSh(\Delta)
    \\
    \downarrow && \downarrow
    \\
    Graph \simeq Sh(\Delta_0) &\hookrightarrow& PSh(\Delta_0)
  }
  \,,
$$

where

* the top horizontal morphism forms the [[nerve of a category]];

* the left vertical morphism sends a category to its underlying graph, [[forgetful functor|forgetting]] [[composition]] and [[identity]]-assignments;

* the right veritcal morphism analogously forgets [[inner Kan complex|inner horn]] fillers etc. and degeneracies

is a [[pullback]].

=--

## Related concepts

* [[Segal space]], [[complete Segal space]], [[n-fold complete Segal space]]

## References

The "Segal conditions" are first discussed in 

* [[Graeme Segal]], _Classifying spaces and spectral sequences_, Inst.
Hautes &Eacute;tudes Sci. Publ. Math., vol. 34, pp. 105–112 (1968),

where they are attributed to [[Alexander Grothendieck]].


The interpretation of the Segal condition as a [[sheaf]] condition is reviewed for instance in section 2 of 

* [[Joachim Kock]], _Polynomial functors and trees_ ([pdf](http://mat.uab.es/~kock/cat/poly-trees.pdf))

and discussed for [[strict infinity-categories]] in 

* [[Clemens Berger]], _A cellular nerve for higher categories_, Advances in Mathematics 169, 118-175 (2002) ([pdf](http://math1.unice.fr/~cberger/nerve.pdf))


[[!redirects Segal conditions]]
