+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
#### Constructivism, Realizability, Computability
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include constructivism - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Systems of _formal_ [[logic]], such as [[type theory]], try to transform expressions into a _canonical form_ which then serves as the end result of the given [[computation]] or [[deduction]]. A formal system is said to enjoy _canonicity_ if every expression reduced to canonical form.

More precisely, in [[type theory]], a [[term]] belonging to some [[type]] is said to be of **canonical form** if it is explicitly built up using the constructors of that type.  A canonical form is in particular a [[normal form]] (one not admitting any reductions), but the converse need not hold.

For example, the terms of type $\mathbb{N}$ (a [[natural numbers type]]) of canonical form are the [[numerals]]
$$ S(S(S(\cdots (0)\cdots ))). $$

A type theory is said to enjoy **canonicity** if every term computes to a canonical form.  This is held to be an important meta-theoretic property of type theory, especially considered as a programming language or as a computational foundation for mathematics.

## Canonicity vs axioms

Adding [[axioms]] to type theory, such as the principle of [[excluded middle]] or the usual version of the [[univalence axiom]], can destroy canonicity.  The axioms result in "stuck terms" which are not of canonical form, yet neither can they be "computed" any further.

For instance, if we assume the law of excluded middle, then we can build a term $case(LEM(Goldbach),0,1) \colon \mathbb{N}$ which is $0$ or $1$ according as the Goldbach conjecture is true or false.  Clearly this term doesn't "compute", but neither is it of canonical form (a numeral).

Similarly, using the univalence axiom, we can obtain a term $p : (\mathbb{N}=\mathbb{N})$ corresponding to the automorphism of $\mathbb{N}$ which adds one to every even number and subtracts one from every odd number.  Then the term $transport(p,0)$ also has type $\mathbb{N}$, but doesn't "compute" because the computer gets "stuck" on the univalence term.

It is conjectured that univalence, unlike excluded middle, can be given a "computational" interpretation while preserving canonicity.  Some partial progress towards this can be found [here](http://homotopytypetheory.org/2011/07/27/canonicity-for-2-dimensional-type-theory/).

## References

Discussion of canonicity in [[homotopy type theory]] with [[univalence]] is discussed in 

* Simon Huber (with [[Thierry Coquand]]), _Towards a computational justification of the Axiom of Univalence_ , talk at _TYPES 2011_ ([pdf](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/~simonhu/slides/types11.pdf))

* [[Dan Licata]], [[Robert Harper]], _Computing with Univalence_  (2012) ([pdf](http://4wft.fmf.uni-lj.si/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/Licata.pdf))


* [[Dan Licata]], _Canonicity for 2-Dimensional Type theory_  (2011) ([web](http://homotopytypetheory.org/2011/07/27/canonicity-for-2-dimensional-type-theory/))

[[!redirects canonical form]]
[[!redirects canonical forms]]
[[!redirects canonicity]]
[[!redirects canonicity for type theory]]
[[!redirects type-theoretic canonicity]]

