
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea ##

(This page discusses the Theory of Homotopy Theories, as derived from the homotopical algebra approach to the subject.  For other topics within the general area of Homotopy Theory, look at the list of related entries. You will probably find what you want. If you don't why not write a page on the topic.)


In the modern perspective (or at least, from the [[nPOV]]) **homotopy theory** is the [[higher category theory]] of [[(∞,1)-category|(∞,1)-categories]]: those $\infty$-[[infinity-category|categories]] in which all [[k-morphism]]s for $k \gt 1$ are invertible.

The archetypical example is the [[(∞,1)-category]] [[∞Grpd]] of [[∞-groupoids]], just as [[Set]] is the archetypical 1-[[category]].

Historically,  the motivating example had been $(\infty,1)$ category [[Top]] of (suitably well-behaved...) [[topological space]]s: objects are topological spaces, morphisms are continuous maps between these, 2-morphisms are [[homotopy|homotopies]] of such maps, and [[k-morphism]]s are higher order homotopies of homotopies.  If "suitably well-behaved" means at least of the [[homotopy type]] of [[CW-complex]]es, then this $(\infty,1)$-category is _equivalent_ to [[∞ Grpd]]. One may think of the notion of [[∞-groupoid]] as being the _intrinsic_ notion, which has various realizations useful in computations, such as [[topological spaces]] or [[simplicial sets]] (see _[[simplicial homotopy theory]]_). 

## Presentations ##

A convenient, powerful, and traditional way to deal with [[(∞,1)-categories]] is to "present" them by 1-categories with specified classes of morphisms called _[[weak equivalence|weak equivalences]]_ : a [[category with weak equivalences]] or [[homotopical category]].  The idea is as follows.  Given a category $C$ with a class $W$ of weak equivalences, we can form its **[[homotopy category]]** or **[[calculus of fractions|category of fractions]]** $C[W^{-1}]$ by adjoining formal inverses to all the morphisms in $W$.  The [[simplicial localization|(∞,1)-category presented by]] $(C,W)$" can be thought of as the result of regarding $C$ as an $\infty$-category with only identity $k$-cells for $k\gt 1$, then adjoining formal inverses to morphisms in $W$ in the $\infty$-categorical sense; that is, making them into [[equivalence|equivalences]] rather than isomorphisms.  It is remarkable that most $(\infty,1)$-categories that arise in mathematics can be presented in this way.

As with presentations of [[group]]s and other algebraic structures, very different presentations can give rise to equivalent $(\infty,1)$-categories.  For example, several different presentations of the $(\infty,1)$-category of $\infty$-groupoids are:

 * $C=$ [[CW-complex]]es, $W=$ [[homotopy equivalence]]s - see _[[Quillen model structure on topological spaces]]_
 * $C=$ [[topological space]]s, $W=$ [[weak homotopy equivalences]]
 * $C=$ [[Kan complex]]es, $W=$ simplicial homotopy equivalences
 * $C=$ [[simplicial set]]s, $W=$ weak homotopy equivalences - see _[[Quillen model structure on simplicial sets]]_
 * $C=$ [[small category|small categories]], $W=$ functors whose nerves are weak homotopy equivalences -- see _[[Thomason model structure]]_.


The latter three can hence be regarded as providing "combinatorial models" for the homotopy theory of topological spaces.

### Model Categories 

The value of working with presentations of $(\infty,1)$-categories rather than the $(\infty,1)$-categories themselves is that the presentations are ordinary 1-categories, and thus much simpler to work with.  For instance, ordinary limits and colimits are easy to construct in the category of topological spaces, or of simplicial sets, and we can then use these to get a handle on $(\infty,1)$-categorical limits and colimits in the $(\infty,1)$-category of $\infty$-groupoids.  However, we always have to make sure that we use only 1-categorical constructions that are _homotopically meaningful_, which essentially means that they induce $(\infty,1)$-categorical meaningful constructions in the presented $(\infty,1)$-category.  In particular, they must be invariant under weak equivalence.

Most presentations of $(\infty,1)$-categories come with additional classes of morphisms, called _fibrations_ and _cofibrations_, that are very useful in performing constructions in a homotopically meaningful way.  Quillen defined a [[model category]] to be a 1-category together with classes of morphisms called weak equivalences, cofibrations, and fibrations that fit together in a very precise way (the term is meant to suggest "a category of models for a homotopy theory").  Many, perhaps most, presentations of $(\infty,1)$-categories are model categories.  Moreover, even when we do not have a model category, we often have classes of cofibrations and fibrations with many of the properties possessed by cofibrations and fibrations in a model category, and even when we do have a model category, there may be classes of cofibrations and fibrations, different from those in the model structure, that are useful for some purposes.

Unlike the weak equivalences, which determine the "homotopy theory" and the $(\infty,1)$-category that it presents, fibrations and cofibrations should be regarded as _technical tools_ which make working directly with the presentation easier (or possible).  Whether a morphism is a fibration or cofibration has no meaning after we pass to the presented $(\infty,1)$-category.  In fact, _every_ morphism is weakly equivalent to a fibration and to a cofibration.  In particular, despite the common use of double-headed arrows for fibrations and hooked arrows for cofibrations, they do not correspond to $(\infty,1)$-categorical epimorphisms and monomorphisms.

In a model category, a morphism which is both a fibration and a weak equivalence is called an **acyclic fibration** or a **trivial fibration**.  Dually we have **acyclic** or **trivial cofibrations**. An object $X$ is called **cofibrant** if the map $0\to X$ from the initial object to $X$ is a cofibration, and **fibrant** if the map $X\to 1$ to the terminal object is a fibration.  The axioms of a model category ensure that for every object $X$ there is an acyclic fibration $Q X \to X$ where $Q X$ is cofibrant and an acyclic cofibration $X\to R X$ where $R X$ is fibrant.

### Examples 

For a (higher) category theorist, the following examples of model categories are perhaps the most useful to keep in mind:

 * $C=$ sets, $W=$ isomorphisms.  _All_ morphisms are both fibrations and cofibrations.  The $(\infty,1)$-category presented is again the 1-category $Set$.
 * $C=$ categories, $W=$ equivalences of categories.  The cofibrations are the functors which are injective on objects, and the fibrations are the [[isofibration|isofibrations]].  The acyclic fibrations are the equivalences of categories which are literally surjective on objects.  Every object is both fibrant and cofibrant.  The $(\infty,1)$-category presented is the 2-category $Cat$.  This is often called the _folk model structure_.
 * $C=$ (strict) 2-categories and (strict) 2-functors, $W=$ 2-functors which are [[equivalence of categories|equivalences of bicategories]].  The fibrations are the 2-functors which are isofibrations on hom-categories and have an equivalence-lifting property.  Every object is fibrant; the cofibrant 2-categories are those whose underlying 1-category is freely generated by some directed graph.  The $(\infty,1)$-category presented is the (weak) 3-category $2Cat$.  This model structure is due to Steve Lack.

### Generalized Morphisms 

The morphisms from $A$ to $B$ in the $(\infty,1)$-category presented by $(C,W)$ are zigzags
$
  \stackrel{\simeq}{\leftarrow}
  \to
  \stackrel{\simeq}{\leftarrow}
  \to
  \cdots
$; these are sometimes called **generalized morphisms**.  Many presentations (including every model category) have the property that any such morphism is equivalent to one with a single zag, as in $\stackrel{\simeq}{\leftarrow} \to \stackrel{\simeq}{\leftarrow}$.  In a model category,  a canonical form for such a zigzag is
$X \stackrel{\simeq}{\leftarrow} Q X \to  R Y \stackrel{\simeq}{\leftarrow} Y$
where $Q X$ is cofibrant and $R Y$ is fibrant.  In this case we can moreover take $Q X\to X$ to be an acyclic fibration and $Y\to R Y$ to be an acyclic cofibration.

Often it suffices to consider even shorter zigzags of the form $\stackrel{\simeq}{\leftarrow} \to$ or $\to \stackrel{\simeq}{\leftarrow}$.  In particular, this is the case if every object is fibrant or every object is cofibrant.  For example:

 * If $X$ and $Y$ are strict 2-categories, then pseudofunctors $X\to Y$ are equivalent to strict 2-functors $Q X \to Y$, where $Q X$ is a cofibrant replacement for $X$.
 * [[anafunctor|anafunctors]] are zigzags $\stackrel{\simeq}{\leftarrow} \to$ in the [[folk model structure]] on 1-categories whose first factor is an acyclic (i.e. surjective) fibration.  
 * [[Morita equivalence|Morita morphisms]] in the theory of [[Lie groupoid|Lie groupoids]] are generalized morphisms of length one where both maps are acyclic fibrations.

If $X$ is cofibrant and $Y$ is fibrant, then every generalized morphism from $X$ to $Y$ is equivalent to an ordinary morphism.  For example, if $X$ is a cofibrant 2-category, then every pseudofunctor $X\to Y$ is equivalent to a strict 2-functor $X\to Y$

### Quillen Equivalences 

Quillen also introduced a highly structured notion of equivalence between model categories, now called a [[Quillen equivalence]], which among other things ensures that they present the same $(\infty,1)$-category.  Quillen equivalences are now being used to compare different definitions of higher categories.

## Related concepts 

* [[synthetic homotopy theory]]

* [[simplicial homotopy theory]]

* [[stable homotopy theory]]

* [[parameterized homotopy theory]]

* [[equivariant homotopy theory]], [[global equivariant homotopy theory]]

* [[chromatic homotopy theory]]

* [[p-adic homotopy theory]]

* [[algebraic homotopy]]: In his talk at the 1950 ICM in Harvard, [[Henry Whitehead]] introduced the idea of [[algebraic homotopy]] theory and said

_"The ultimate aim of algebraic homotopy is to construct a purely
  algebraic theory, which is equivalent to homotopy theory in the same sort of 
  way that 'analytic' is equivalent to 'pure' projective geometry."_

This theme was taken up  by Baues, (1988), using a type of abstract homotopy theory closely related to Ken Brown's [[category of fibrant objects|categories of fibrant objects]].  Whitehead's own work was extended by Ronnie Brown and Phil Higgins, see [[nonabelian algebraic topology]].

*  [[homotopy type theory]]: A formalization of homotopy theory in terms of [[Martin-Löf dependent type theory]] is _[[homotopy type theory]]_.

## Related entries ##

* [[algebraic homotopy]]

* [[proper homotopy theory]]

* [[category of fibrant objects]]
* [[category with weak equivalences]]
* [[closed monoidal deformation retract]]
* [[closed monoidal homotopical category]]
* [[cylinder functor]], [[cocylinder]]
* [[derived functor]]
* [[deformation retract of a homotopical category]], [[neighborhood retract]]
* [[Dold fibration]]
* [[equivalence]]
* [[folk model structure]]
* [[fundamental groupoid]]
* [[homological resolution]]
* [[homotopical category]]
* [[homotopical cohomology theory]]
* [[homotopy]], [[homotopy group]]
* [[homotopy category]]
* [[homotopy limit]], [[homotopy colimit]]
* [[homotopy coherent category theory]]
* [[Hurewicz fibration]], [[Hurewicz connection]], [[Hurewicz cofibration]]
* [[interval object]]
* [[model category]]
* [[model structure on crossed complexes]]
* [[model structure on simplicial sets]], [[model structure on dendroidal sets]]
* [[path object]], [[path groupoid]], [[path n-groupoid]]

* [[rational homotopy theory]], [[p-adic homotopy theory]]

* [[test category]]
* [[topology]]
* [[weak equivalence]]

## References 
 {#References}

The original axiomatization of homotopy theory by [[model categories]] is due to

* [[Daniel Quillen]], _Homotopical algebra_, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 43, Berlin, New York, 1967

The similar axiomatization involving the weaker structure of a [[calculus of fractions]] is due to

* [[Pierre Gabriel]], [[Michel Zisman]], _[[Calculus of fractions and homotopy theory]]_, _Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete_, Band 35. Springer, New York (1967) 

A standard account of the modern form of [[simplicial homotopy theory]] is in

* [[Paul Goerss]], [[Rick Jardine]], _[[Simplicial homotopy theory]]_, Progress in Mathematics, Birkhäuser (1996)

Formulation of abstract homotopy theory as the theory of [[(∞,1)-toposes]] is due to 

* [[Jacob Lurie]], _[[Higher Topos Theory]]_

and the formalization of this in the [[internal logic|internal language]] of [[homotopy type theory]] is due to

* Univalent Foundations Project, _[[Homotopy Type Theory -- Univalent Foundations of Mathematics]]_ (2013)


See also

* H. J. Baues, _Homotopy types_, in  _Handbook of Algebraic Topology_, (edited by I.M. James), North Holland, 1995.

* [[Zhen Lin Low]], _[[Notes on homotopical algebra]]_

* [[Emily Riehl]], _[[Categorical Homotopy Theory]]_


* [[Julia Bergner]], _A survey of $(\infty,1)$-categories_ ([arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0610239)).

* [[William Dwyer]], _Homotopy theory and classifying spaces_, Copenhagen, June 2008 ([pdf](http://www.math.ku.dk/~jg/homotopical2008/Dwyer.CopenhagenNotes.pdf))

* [[William Dwyer]], P .Hirschhorn, [[Daniel Kan]], [[Jeff Smith]], _Homotopy Limit Functors on Model Categories and Homotopical Categories_, volume 113 of _Mathematical Surveys and Monographs_, American Mathematical Society (2004) (there exists [this](http://dodo.pdmi.ras.ru/~topology/books/dhks.pdf) pdf copy of what seems to be a preliminary version of this book)

* K. H. Kamps and [[Tim Porter]], _Abstract Homotopy and Simple Homotopy Theory_ ([GoogleBooks](http://books.google.de/books?id=7JYKxInRMdAC&dq=Porter+Kamps&printsec=frontcover&source=bl&ots=uuyl_tIjs4&sig=Lt8I92xQBZ4DNKVXD0x76WkcxCE&hl=de&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=3&ct=result#PPP1,M1))

* [[Emily Riehl]], _Categorical homotopy theory_, Lecture notes ([pdf](http://www.math.harvard.edu/~eriehl/266x/lectures.pdf))

Brief indications of open questions and future directions (as of 2013) of [[algebraic topology]] and [[stable homotopy theory]] are in 

* [[Tyler Lawson]], _The future_, Talbot lectures 2013 ([pdf](http://math.mit.edu/conferences/talbot/2013/19-Lawson-thefuture.pdf))

and in

* _Problems in homotopy theory_ ([wiki](http://topology-octopus.herokuapp.com/problemsinhomotopytheory/show/HomePage))
 {#ProblemsInHomotopyTheoryWiki}



[[!redirects Homotopy Theory]]
[[!redirects homotopy theories]]
