
> under construction

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

This page is meant to be useful for readers who are interested in [[homotopy theory]] but not (necessarily) in [[homotopy type theory]] as such (its role as a [[symbolic logic]], etc.) but who do care learning about whatever new methods that may make them be better homotopy theorists, and about any new insights into homotopy theory itself that could be gained by applying methods that originate in homotopy type theory. In other words, this page is meant to help answer the question:

> I am a homotopy theorist; what can homotopy type theory do for me?

Since homotopy theory takes place in [[model categories]] and similar categorical structures, the input from homotopy type theory is via its [[categorical semantics]]. In this sense the question which this page is meant to help to answer is

> I am a homotopy theorist; which methods can I learn from the [[categorical semantics of homotopy type theory]]?

For the moment this page will mostly list pointers with brief comments to other entries where details are given. You should maybe read it like an instructional exercise list and follow the pointers for help.

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## The perspective from slice categories

From the perspective of [[dependent type theory]] [[categories]] $\mathcal{C}$ are regarded systematically via the collection of their [[slice categories]] (their "[[hyperdoctrines]]"). If $\mathcal{C}$ is a [[locally cartesian closed category]] then every [[morphism]] $f : X \to Y$ in $\mathcal{C}$ induces an [[adjoint triple]] of functors between the corresponding slice categories

([[dependent sum]] $\dashv$ [[base change]] $\dashv$ [[dependent product]]) = $(\sum_f \dashv f^* \dashv \prod_f) : \mathcal{C}_{/X} \to \mathcal{C}_{/Y}$.

Many familiar constructions are usefully expressed entirely in terms of these adjoint triples. For instance the [[internal hom]] in a slice category. 

## Formulas for homotopy pullbacks and homotopy fibers

The yoga of [[homotopy pullbacks]], [[homotopy fibers]], [[loop space objects]], [[fiber sequences]] etc. is basic to [[homotopy theory]], and of course is also fairly elementary. Homotopy type theory can hardly add a previously unknown fact here. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that many of these constructions, elementary as they are, look _even simpler_ when formulated in homotopy type theory. The homotopy theorist may at least enjoy to see this elegance of formalism given to the basis of his field.

1. The [[homotopy pullback]] of two morphisms $f : A \to C$, $g : B \to C$ including the [[factorization lemma]] used to compute it for [[fibrant objects]], is naturally given by the base change operation expressed by the formula

   $$
     f \times_C^h g \simeq \{ a : A, b : B | (f(a) = g(b)) \}
   $$

   Accordingly for the [[homotopy fiber]].

1. For instance the [[free loop space object]] of an object $X$ is expressed by the amusing formula

   $$
     \mathcal{L}X = \{x,y : X | (x = y) and (x = y) \} = \{x,y: X | (x,x) = (y,y)\}
     \,.
   $$

1. [[pasting law]] (...)


## Formulas for (detecting) $n$-truncation

The central insight (due to [[Vladimir Voevodsky]]) that boosts dependent type theory with identity types to genuine homotopy type theory is that in terms of [[identity types]] there are simple natural expressions for [[n-truncated|n-truncation]] and detection of $n$-truncation of objects and morphisms. Translated via [[categorical semantics]] to [[homotopy theory]], these formulas turn out to refomulate some basic yoga of model category computation in a new way that hasn't received attention before in homotopy theory, emphasizing the base change adjoint triple. 

1. detecting if an object $X$ is [[(-2)-truncated]] is naturally expressed by the [[isContr]]-operation  

   $$
     isContr(X) = \sum_{x : X} \prod_{y : X} (x = Y)
     \,.
   $$

1. A morphism $f : E \to X$ is [[n-truncated]] if "all of its" [[homotopy fibers]] are $n$-truncated, where "all" is given by the dependent product.

   This way of stating it is considerably more true to the concept than what has been in the literature before. 

1. In particular, it is an [[equivalence in an (infinity,1)-category]] if "all of" its homotopy fiber are contractible.

   $isEquiv(f) = ( \prod_{x : {X}} isContr(hfiber(f,x) )$.

(...)

## Specific HoTT proofs in homotopy theory

We list in the following theorems in homotopy theory together with such proofs of them in terms of homotopy type theory language that are either new (to the best of our knowledge), or else that are at least considerably simpler than earlier proofs with traditional homotopy theory tools.



### Essential uniquenes of group units

(...)

### Equivalence of notions of stabilizer $\infty$-groups

(...) [...](http://nforum.mathforge.org/discussion/3454/stabilizer-subgroup/?Focus=28287#Comment_28287)

(...)