+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark
Let $G$ be a $k$-group-functor. Then the following conditions are equivalent:

1. $G$ is the [[Cartier dual]] of a constant group.

1. $G$ is an affine $k$-group and the $k$-ring $O(G)$ is generated by the morphisms $G\to \mu_k$ (these are called *characters of $G$).
=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition
A $k$-group satisfying the conditions of the previous remark is called *diagnalizable $k$-group*.
=--

+-- {: .num_theorem}
###### Theorem
Let $G$ be a $k$-group. Then the following conditions are equivalent:

1. $G\otimes_k k_s$ is diagonalizable.

1. $G\otimes_k K$ is diagonalizable for a field $K\in M_k$.

1. $G$ is the Cartier dual of an étale $k$-group.

1. $\hat D(G)$ is an étale $k$-formal group.

1. $Gr_k(G,\alpha_k)=0$

1. (If $p\not =0)$, $V_G$ is an epimorphism

1. (If $p\not =0)$, $V_G$ is an isomorphism
=--

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition and Remark
1. A $k$-group satisfying the conditions of the previous theorem is called *[[multiplicative k-group]]*.

1. Multiplicative $k$-groups correspond by duality to étale formal $k$-groups.

1. The category $ACm_k$ of multiplicative $k$-groups forma a subcategory of the category $AC_k$ of affine commutative $k$-groups which is stable under forming subgroups, quatients, extensions (the set of these properties says that the subcategory is [[thick subcategory|thick]]) and limits.

1. $ACm_k$ is (contravariant) equivalent to the category of [[Galois module|Galois modules]]: To $G$ corresponds the Galois module $\hat D(G\otimes_k k_s)(k_s)=Gr_{k_s}(G\otimes_k k_s,\mu_{k_s})$.

1. If $E$ is an étale $k$-group, then $D(E)$ is multiplicative and $\hat D(D(E))=E$. And we have $D(D(E))=E$. The duality is hence given by $E\to D(E)$ , $G\to D(G)$ without reference to formal groups.
=--