pages/776.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Limits and colimits
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-limits - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition


In a [[category]] $C$ a diagram of morphisms of $C$ 
$$U \underoverset{b}{a}{\rightrightarrows} V \overset{c}{\rightarrow} X $$
is called a **coequalizer** diagram if
 
1. $c a=c b$; and 
1. $c$ is universal for this property: i.e. if $f: V \to Y$ is a morphism of $C$ such that $f a=f b$, then there is a unique morphism $f': X \to Y$ such that $f'c=f$. 

This concept is a special case of that of [[colimit]]; specifically, it's the colimit of the diagram
$$U \underoverset{b}{a}{\rightrightarrows} V .$$

A coequalizer in $C$ is an [[equalizer]] in the [[opposite category]] $C^{op}$.

[[!redirects coequalizers]]
[[!redirects coequaliser]]
[[!redirects coequalize]]
[[!redirects coequalise]]
[[!redirects coequalisers]]
[[!redirects coequalizes]]
[[!redirects coequalises]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 107191 Revision date: 2016-04-05 09:08:10 Page name: coequalizer Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 131.220.184.222

pages/776.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Limits and colimits
+--{: .hide}
[[!include infinity-limits - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition


In a [[category]] $C$ a diagram of morphisms of $C$ 
$$U \underoverset{b}{a}{\rightrightarrows} V \overset{c}{\rightarrow} X $$
is called a **coequalizer** diagram if
 
1. $c a=c b$; and 
1. $c$ is universal for this property: i.e. if $f: V \to Y$ is a morphism of $C$ such that $f a=f b$, then there is a unique morphism $f': X \to Y$ such that $f'c=f$. 

This concept is a special case of that of [[colimit]]; specifically, it's the colimit of the diagram
$$U \underoverset{b}{a}{\rightrightarrows} V .$$

A coequalizer in $C$ is an [[equalizer]] in the [[opposite category]] $C^{op}$.

## Examples

* In [[Set]], the coequalizer of two [[functions]] $f$, $g$ is the [[quotient set]] by the [[equivalence relation]] $f(x) \sim g(y)$.

[[!redirects coequalizers]]
[[!redirects coequaliser]]
[[!redirects coequalize]]
[[!redirects coequalise]]
[[!redirects coequalisers]]
[[!redirects coequalizes]]
[[!redirects coequalises]]
