
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
#### Stable Homotopy theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include stable homotopy theory - contents]]
=--
#### Representation theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include representation theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

What is called _KR-theory_ ([Atiyah 66](#Atiyah66)) is variant of [[topological K-theory]] on [[spaces]] equipped with a $\mathbb{Z}_2$-[[action]] (by [[homeomorphism]], hence equipped with one [[involution|involutive]] homeomorphism -- a "[[real space]]").

In terms of [[cocycle]] models, classes of KR-theory are represented by [[complex vector bundles]] over $X$ on which the involution on their base space lifts to an _anti-linear_ involution of the total space. Over manifolds with trivial involution these are precisely the [[complexification]] of [[real vector bundles]] and hence over such spaces $KR$-theory reduces to [[KO]]-[[cohomology theory|theory]]. Conversely, over two copies $X \cup X$ lof $X$ equipped with the involution that interchanges the two, $KR$-theory reduces to [[KU]]-[[cohomology theory|theory]]. Finally over $X \times S^1$ with the involution the antipodal identification on the second ([[circle]]) factor , $KR$-theory reduces to the self-conjugate [[KSC-theory]] ([Anderson 64](#Anderson64)). So in general $KR$-theory interpolates between all these cases. For instance on $X \times S^1$ with the reflection-involution on the circle (the [[real space]] denoted $S^{1,1}$) it behaves like $KO$-theory at the two involution fixed points (the two [[O-planes]]) and like $KU$ in their complement (a model that makes this very explicit is given in [DMR 13, section 4](#DMR13)), schematically:

$$
  KR(S^{1,1}) = ( KO --- KU --- KO )
$$


More abstractly, complex conjugation of complex vecgtor bundles induces on the [[complex K-theory]] [[spectrum]] [[KU]] an involutive [[automorphism]]. $KR$ is the corresponding $\mathbb{Z}_2$-[[equivariant spectrum]], and $KR$-theory the corresponding $\mathbb{Z}_2$-[[equivariant cohomology]] theory.  In particular, the [[homotopy fixed point]] of [[KU]] under this automorphism is [[KO]]

$$
  KO \simeq (KU)^{\mathbb{Z}/2}
$$

and this way where in complex K-theory one has [[KU]]-[[modules]] ([[∞-modules]]), so in KR-theory one has $KO$-modules.

KR is an example of a [[real-oriented cohomology theory]], together with for instance [[MR-theory]] and [[BPR-theory]].

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark on terminology

Hence $X$ here is equipped with an [[involution]] by a [[diffeomorphism]]. In this context this is often thought of as a non-linear [[real structure]] and so these spaces are called "real spaces". Following this, $KR$-theory is usually pronounced "real K-theory". But **beware** that this terminology easily conflicts with or is confused with [[KO]]-theory. For disambiguation the latter might better be called "orthogonal K-theory". But on abstract grounds maybe $KR$-theory would best be just called $\mathbb{Z}_2$-equivariant complex K-theory.

=--

## Properties

### As induced from the derived moduli stack of tori
 {#InducedFromModuliStackOfTori}

The relation between $KU$, $KO$ and $KR$ naturally arises in [[chromatic homotopy theory]] as follows.

Inside the [[moduli stack of formal group laws]] sits the _[[moduli stack of tori|moduli stack of one dimensional tori]]_ $\mathcal{M}_{\mathbb{G}_m}$ ([Lawson-Naumann 12, def. A.1, A.3](#LawsonNaumann12)). This is equivalent to the [[quotient stack]] of the point by the [[group of order 2]]

$$
  \mathcal{M}_{\mathbb{G}_m}\simeq \mathbf{B}\mathbb{Z}_2
$$

([Lawson-Naumann 12, prop. A.4](#LawsonNaumann12)). Here the $\mathbb{Z}_2$-action is the inversion involution on [[abelian groups]].

Using the [[Goerss-Hopkins-Miller theorem]] this stack carries an [[E-∞ ring]]-valued [[structure sheaf]] $\mathcal{O}^{top}$ ([Lawson-Naumann 12, theorem A.5](#LawsonNaumann12)); and by the above equivalence this is a single [[E-∞ ring]] equipped with a $\mathbb{Z}_2$-[[∞-action]]. This is [[KU]] with its involution induced by [[complex conjugation]], hence essentially is $KR$. 

Accordingly, the [[global sections]] of $\mathcal{O}^{top}$ over $\mathcal{M}_{\mathbb{G}_m}$ are the $\mathbb{Z}_2$-[[homotopy fixed points]] of this action, hence is $KO$. This is further amplified in ([Mathew 13, section 3](#Mathew13)) and ([Mathew, section 2](#Mathew)).

As suggested there and by the main ([Lawson-Naumann 12, theorem 1.2](#LawsonNaumann12)) this realizes (at least localized at $p = 2$) the inclusion $KO \to KU$ as the restriction of an analogous inclusion of [[tmf]] built as the global sections of the similarly derived [[moduli stack of elliptic curves]].




## Related concepts

* [[real-oriented cohomology theory]]

  * [[MR-theory]]

  * [[BPR-theory]]

* [[orientifold]]

* [[KO-dimension]]

[[!include chromatic tower examples - table]]

[[!include string theory and cohomology theory -- table]]

[[!include moduli stack of curves -- table]]

## References

KR theory was introduced in

* {#Atiyah66} [[Michael Atiyah]], _K-theory and reality_, The Quarterly Journal of Mathematics. Oxford. Second Series 17 (1) (1966),: 367–386, doi:10.1093/qmath/17.1.367, ISSN 0033-5606, MR 0206940

The version of $KSC$-theory was introduced in 

* {#Anderson64} D. W. Anderson, _The real K-theory of classifying spaces_ Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 51(4):634–636, 1964.

The dual concept of KR-homology was defined in

* [[Gennady Kasparov]], _The operator K-functor and extensions of $C^\ast$-algebras,_ Izv. Akad. Nauk. SSSR Ser. Mat. 44, 571-636 (1980).

Further discussion includes

* [[Johan Dupont]], _Symplectic bundles and $KR$-theory_ (1967) ([pdf](http://www.mscand.dk/article.php?id=1908))

Reviews include

* Wikipedia, _[KR-theory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KR-theory)_

Discussion more in abstract [[stable homotopy theory]] and [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]] is in 

* Paolo Masulli, _Equivariant homotopy: $KR$-theory_, Master thesis (2011) ([pdf](http://www.math.ku.dk/~jg/students/masulli.msthesis.2011.pdf))

* {#Dugger03} [[Daniel Dugger]], _An Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence for $KR$-theory_ ([arXiv:0304099](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0304099))

Remarks on homotopy-theoretic KR in the context of [[algebraic K-theory]] are in

* [[Vigleik Angeltveit]], [[Andrew Blumberg]], Teena Gerhardt, Michael Hill, _Algebraic K-theory and equivariant homotopy theory_, 2012 ([pdf](http://www.birs.ca/workshops/2012/12w5116/report12w5116.pdf))

Explicit [[groupoid]]/[[stack]] models for equivariant and twisted KR-theory theory are discussed in

* El-kaïoum M. Moutuou, _Twistings of KR for Real groupoids_ ([arXiv:1110.6836](http://arxiv.org/abs/1110.6836))

* {#Freed12} [[Daniel Freed]], _Lectures on twisted K-theory and orientifolds_, lectures at ESI Vienna, 2012 ([[FreedESI2012.pdf:file]])

This is with motivation from _[[orientifolds]]_, see the references given there for more. A long list of computations of twisted $KR$-classes on tori with applications to [[T-duality]] on [[orientifolds]] is in

* {#DMR13} Charles Doran, Stefan Mendez-Diez, [[Jonathan Rosenberg]], _T-duality For Orientifolds and Twisted KR-theory_ ([arXiv:1306.1779](http://arxiv.org/abs/1306.1779))

* {#DMR14} Charles Doran, Stefan Mendez-Diez, [[Jonathan Rosenberg]], _String theory on elliptic curve orientifolds and KR-theory_ ([arXiv:1402.4885](http://arxiv.org/abs/1402.4885))


Discussion of $KU$ with its $\mathbb{Z}_2$-action as the [[E-∞ ring]]-valued [[structure sheaf]] of the moduli stack of tori is due to 

* {#LawsonNaumann12} [[Tyler Lawson]], [[Niko Naumann]], appendix of _Strictly commutative realizations of diagrams over the Steenrod algebra and topological modular forms at the prime 2_ ([arXiv:1203.1696](http://arxiv.org/abs/1203.1696))

which is reviewed and amplified further in 

* {#Mathew13} [[Akhil Mathew]], section 3 of _The homology of $tmf$ ([arXiv:1305.6100](http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.6100)) 

* {#Mathew} Akhil Mathew, section 2 of _The homotopy groups of $TMF$_, talk notes ([pdf](http://math.mit.edu/~sglasman/tmfhomotopy.pdf))

Explicit computation of [[KO]] as the [[homotopy fixed points]] of the $\mathbb{Z}_2$-action on $KU$ is due to ([Dugger 03](#Dugger03))
and reviewed in section 7.3 of 

* [[Michael Hill]], [[Michael Hopkins]], [[Douglas Ravenel]], _The Arf-Kervaire problem in algebraic topology: Sketch of the proof_ ([[HHRKervaire.pdf:file]])

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

$\,$

[[!redirects KR-homology]]

[[!redirects KR-theory]]