
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

For $R$ a [[ring]], the _Brauer group_ $Br(R)$ is the [[group]] of [[Morita equivalence]] classes of [[Azumaya algebras]] over $R$.

## Properties

### Relation to &eacute;tale cohomology
 {#RelationToEtaleCohomology}

The Brauer group of a [[ring]] $R$ is a [[torsion]] subgroup of the second [[etale cohomology]] group of $Spec R$ with values in the [[multiplicative group]] $\mathbb{G}_m$

$$
  Br(X) \hookrightarrow H^2_{et}(X, \mathbb{G}_m)
  \,.
$$

This was first stated in ([Grothendieck 68](#Grothendieck)), a discussion is in chapter IV of ([Milne](#Milne)). A detailed discussion in the context of [[nonabelian cohomology]] is in ([Giraud](#Giraud)).

A theorem stating conditions under which the Brauer group is precisely the [[torsion]] subgroup of $H^2_{et}(X, \mathbb{G}_m)$ is due to ([Gabber](#Gabber)), see also the review in ([de Jong](#deJong)). For more details and more literature on this see ([Bertuccioni](#Bertuccioni)).


This fits into the following pattern

* $H^0_{et}(R, \mathbb{G}_m) = R^\times$ ([[group of units]])

* $H^1_{et}(R, \mathbb{G}_m) = Pic(R)$ ([[Picard group]]: iso classes of invertible $R$-modules)

* $H^2_{et}(R, \mathbb{G}_m)_{tor} = Br(R)$ ([[Brauer group]]: 
[[Morita equivalence]] classes of [[Azumaya algebras]] over $R$)




### Relation to derived &eacute;tale cohomology

More generally, this works for $R$ a (connective) [[E-infinity ring]] 
(the following is due to [[David Gepner]]). 

Let $GL_1(R)$ be its [[infinity-group of units]]. 
If $R$ is [[connective spectrum|connective]], then the first [[Postnikov tower|Postikov stage]] of the [[Picard group|Picard]] [[infinity-groupoid]]

$$
  Pic(R) \coloneqq Mod(R)^\times
$$

is
 
$$
  \array{
   \mathbf{B}_{et} GL_1(-) &\to& Pic(-)
   \\
   && \downarrow
   \\
   && \mathbb{Z}
  }
  \,,
$$

where the top morphism is the inclusion of locally free $R$-modules.

so $H^1_{et}(R, GL_1)$ is not equal to $\pi_0 Pic(R)$, but it is off only by $H^0_{et}(R, \mathbb{Z}) = \prod_{components of R} \mathbb{Z}$.

Let $Mod_R$ be the [[(infinity,1)-category]] of $R$-[[module spectra|modules]].

There is a notion of $Mod_R$-[[enriched (infinity,1)-category]], of "$R$-linear $(\infty,1)$-categories".

$Cat_R \coloneqq Mod_R$-modiles in [[presentable (infinity,1)-categories]].

Forming module $(\infty,1)$-categories is then an [[(infinity,1)-functor]]

$$
  Alg_R \stackrel{Mod}{\to} Cat_R
$$

Write $Cat'_R \hookrightarrow Car_R$ for the image of $Mod$.  Then define the [[Brauer group|Brauer]] [[infinity-group]] to be

$$
  Br(R) \coloneqq (Cat'_R)^\times
$$

One shows (Gepner) that this is exactly the Azumaya $R$-algebras modulo Morita equivalence.

**Theorem** (B. Antreau, D. Gepner) 

1. For $R$ a connective $E_\infty$ ring, any Azumaya $R$-algebra $A$ is &eacute;tale locally trivial: there is an [[etale topology|etale cover]] $R \to S$ such that $A \wedge_R S \stackrel{Morita \simeq}{\to} S$.

   (Think of this as saying that an Azumaya $R$-algebra is &eacute;tale-locally a Matric algebra, hence Morita-trivial: a "bundle of compact operators" presenting a (torsion) $GL_1(R)$-2-bundle).

1. $Br : CAlg_R^{\geq 0} \to Gpd_\infty$ is a sheaf for the [[etale cohomology]].

**Corollary** 

1. $Br$ is [[connected object in an (infinity,1)-topos|connected]]. Hence $Br \simeq \mathbf{B}_{et} \Omega Br $.

1. $\Omega Br \simeq Pic$, hence $Br \simeq \mathbf{B}_{et} Pic$

  
[[Postnikov tower]] for $GL_1(R)$:

$$
  for\; n \gt 0: \pi_n GL_1(S) \simeq \pi_n 
$$

hence for $R \to S$ e&eacute;tale

$$
  \pi_n S \simeq \pi_n R \otimes_{\pi_0 R} \pi_0 S
$$

This is a [[quasi-coherent sheaf]] on $\pi_0 R$ of the form $\tilde N$ (quasicoherent sheaf associated with a module), for $N$ an $\pi_0 R$-module. By vanishing theorem of higher cohomology for quasicoherent sheaves

$$
  H_{et}^1(\pi_0 R, \tilde N) = 0; for p \gt 0
$$

For every [[(infinity,1)-sheaf]] $G$ of [[infinity-groups]], there is a [[spectral sequence]]

$$
  H_{et}^p(\pi_0 R; \tilde \pi_q G) \Rightarrow \pi_{q-p} G(R)
$$

(the second argument on the left denotes the $qth$ Postnikov stage). From this one gets the following.

* $\tilde \pi_0 Br \simeq *$

* $\tilde \pi_1 Br \simeq \mathbb{Z}$;

* $\tilde \pi_2 Br \simeq \tilde \pi_1 Pic \simeq \pi_0 GL_1 \simeq \mathbb{G}_m$

* $\tilde \pi_n Br$ is quasicoherent for $n \gt 2$.

there is an [[exact sequence]]

$$
  0 \to 
  H_{et}^2(\pi_0 R, \mathbb{G}_m)
  \to \pi_0 Br(R)
  \to H_{et}^1(\pi_0 R, \mathbb{Z})
  \to 0
$$

(notice the inclusion $Br(\pi_0 R) \hookrightarrow H_{et}^2(\pi_0 R, \mathbb{G}_m)$)

this is [[split exact sequence|split exact]] and so computes $\pi_0 Br(R)$ for connective $R$.

Now some more on the case that $R$ is not connective. 

Suppose there exists $R \stackrel{\phi}{\to} S$ which is a faithful 
[[Galois extension]] for $G$ a [[finite group]].

**Examples** 

1. (real into complex [[K-theory spectrum]]) $KO \to KU$ (this is $\mathbb{Z}_2$) 

1. [[tmf]] $\to tmf(3)$

Give $R \to S$, have a [[fiber sequence]]

$$
  Gl_1(R/S) \stackrel{fib}{\to} GL_1(R) \to GL_1(S)
  \to 
  Pic(R/S) \stackrel{fib}{\to} Pic(R) \to Pic(S)
  \to
  Br(R/S) \stackrel{fib}{\to} Br(R) \to Br(S) \to \cdots
$$

**Theorem** (descent theorems) (Tyler Lawson, David Gepner) Given $G$-Galois extension $R \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} S^{hG}$ ([[homotopy fixed points]])

1. $Mod_R \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} Mod_S^{hG}$

1. $Alg_R \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} Alg_S^{hG}$

it follows that there is a homotopy fixed points spectral sequence

$$
  H^p(G, \pi_\bullet \Sigma^n GL_1(S))
  \Rightarrow
  \pi_{-n} GL_1(S)
$$


**Conjecture** The spectral sequence gives an Azumaya $KO$-algebra $Q$ which is a nontrivial element in $Br(KO)$ but becomes trivial in $Br(KU)$.

## Related concepts

* [[group of units]]/[[multiplicative group]], [[Picard group]]

* [[Azumaya algebra]]


## References

An introduction is in

* Pete Clark, _On the Brauer group_  (2003) ([pdf](http://math.uga.edu/~pete/trivial2003.pdf))



* [[Alexandre Grothendieck]], _Le groupe de Brauer_, Dix expos&eacute;s sur la cohomologie des sch&eacute;mas_, Masson and North-Holland, Paris
and Amsterdam, (1968), pp. 46–66.
 {#Grothendieck}

The relation to [[cohomology]]/[[etale cohomology]] is discussed in

* [[James Milne]], _&Eacute;tale cohomology_, Princeton Mathematical Series, vol. 33, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New
Jersey (1980)
 {#Milne}

* [[Jean Giraud]], _Cohomologie non abelienne_, Die Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften, vol. 179, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1971.
 {#Giraud}

* O. Gabber, _Some theorems on Azumaya algebras_, Ph. D. Thesis, Harvard University, 1978, Groupe de Brauer, Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, vol. 844, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1981, pp. 129–209.

* [[Aise Johan de Jong]], _A result of Gabber_ ([pdf](http://www.math.columbia.edu/~dejong/papers/2-gabber.pdf))
 {#deJong}
  
* Inta Bertuccioni, _Brauer groups and cohomology_, Archiv der Mathematik, vol. 84 Number 5 (2005)
 {#Bertuccioni}


[[!redirects Brauer groups]]

---
LNM0181 DeMeyer and Ingraham

<http://math.columbia.edu/~dejong/wordpress/?p=2062>

Skorobogatov: torsors book, for good intro to selmer/brauer gps etc.

Check work of Skorobogatov and Colliot-Th.

File: Brauer group basics, in folder AG/Various

[Skorobogatov webpage](http://www2.imperial.ac.uk/~anskor/publ.htm)

Skorobogatov and Zarhin: [A finiteness thm for the Brauer group of abelian varieties and K3 surfaces](http://www2.imperial.ac.uk/~anskor/SZ-JAG.pdf)

<http://mathoverflow.net/questions/67812/is-the-brauer-group-of-a-surface-an-elliptic-curve>

<http://mathoverflow.net/questions/7537/two-conjectures-by-gabber-on-brauer-and-picard-groups>

<http://mathoverflow.net/questions/78508/brauer-group-of-complete-dvr>

<http://mathoverflow.net/questions/79575/how-do-brauer-groups-relate-to-zeta-functions>

A [book by Caenepeel](http://books.google.no/books?id=8FMrBg4SjUUC&printsec=frontcover&dq=inauthor:%22Stefaan+Caenepeel%22&source=bl&ots=wBkXFoIaCD&sig=2d8_hDqiMZRX5P30U6LcotrCpm4&hl=no&sa=X&ei=0yEhUOf0Gsmo4gTxy4HoBQ&ved=0CEIQ6AEwAg#v=onepage&q&f=false) with material on Grothendieck topologies and Br.

See the end of Jinhyun Park's note on proper base change, last paragraph on representability of Pic. Is there a Brauer scheme representing Br???

[arXiv:1211.6161](http://front.math.ucdavis.edu/1211.6161) Etale twists in noncommutative algebraic geometry and the twisted Brauer space
fra arXiv Front: math.AG av Benjamin Antieau
This paper studies etale twists of derived categories of schemes and
associative algebras. A general method, based on a new construction called the
twisted Brauer space, is given for classifying etale twists, and a complete
classification is carried out for genus 0 curves, quadrics, and noncommutative
projective spaces. A partial classification is given for curves of higher
genus. The techniques build upon my recent work with David Gepner on the Brauer
groups of commutative ring spectra.

[arXiv:1210.0290](http://front.math.ucdavis.edu/1210.0290) Brauer groups and étale cohomology in derived algebraic geometry
fra arXiv Front: math.AG av Benjamin Antieau, David Gepner
In this paper, we study Azumaya algebras and Brauer groups in derived
algebraic geometry. We establish various fundamental facts about Brauer groups
in this setting, and we provide a computational tool, which we use to compute
the Brauer group in several examples. In particular, we show that the Brauer
group of the sphere spectrum vanishes, and we use this to prove two uniqueness
theorems for the stable homotopy category. Our key technical results include
the local geometricity, in the sense of Artin n-stacks, of the moduli space of
perfect modules over a smooth and proper algebra, the étale local triviality
of Azumaya algebras over connective derived schemes, and a local to global
principle for the algebraicity of stacks of stable categories.

Alexei Skorobogatov (Imperial). Talk from 2012? "Towards calculating the transcendental Brauer group" (MR13, 2:30pm as usual) Abstract: The transcendental Brauer group is the part of the Brauer group of a variety that survives the extension of the ground field to its algebraic closure. I will address the finiteness problem for the transcendental Brauer group, give examples when it can be bounded or even computed explicitly, and discuss some other related results.

nLab page on [[nlab:Brauer group]]
