

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
#### Higher linear algebra
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
#### Higher spin geometry
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include higher spin geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _string orientation of tmf_ is the universal [[orientation in generalized cohomology]] for [[tmf]]-cohomology ("universal [[elliptic cohomology]]), given by a [[homomorphism]]

$$  
  \sigma \;\colon\; M String \longrightarrow tmf
$$

of [[E-∞ rings]], from the [[String structure]]-[[Thom spectrum]] to [[tmf]]  This is refinement of the [[Witten genus]] (see there for more)

$$
  w \;\colon\; \Omega^{String,rat}_\bullet \longrightarrow MF_\bullet
$$

(with values in the ring of [[modular forms]]) which it reproduces on [[homotopy groups]]

$$
  w \simeq \pi_\bullet(\sigma)
  \,.
$$

For this reason the string orientation of [[tmf]] is also referred to as the "topological Witten genus".

All this is due to ([Ando-Hopkins-Strickland 01](#AndoHopkinsStrickland01), [Ando-Hopkins-Rezk 10](#AndoHopkinsRezk10)).

See the Idea-section at _[[tmf]]_ and at _[[Witten genus]]_ for more background.


## Related concepts

* [[sigma-orientation]]

* [[logarithmic cohomology operation]]


## References

The construction of the string orientation and its relation to the Witten genus is due to

* {#AndoHopkinsStrickland01} [[Matthew Ando]], [[Michael Hopkins]], [[Neil Strickland]], _Elliptic spectra, the Witten genus and the theorem of the cube_, Invent. Math. 146 (2001) 595–687 MR1869850

* {#AndoHopkinsRezk10} [[Matthew Ando]], [[Mike Hopkins]], [[Charles Rezk]], _Multiplicative orientations of KO-theory and the spectrum of topological modular forms_, 2010 ([pdf](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/~mando/papers/koandtmf.pdf))

following announcements of results in 

* [[Michael Hopkins]], _Algebraic topology and modular forms_ in Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians,
Vol. I (Beijing, 2002), pages 291–317, Beijing, 2002. Higher Ed. Press ([arXiv:math/0212397](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0212397)) 

which in turn follows the general program outlined in

* [[Michael Hopkins]], _Topological modular forms, the Witten genus, and the theorem of the cube_, Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. 1, 2 (Z¨urich, 1994) (Basel), Birkhäuser, 1995, 554–565. MR 97i:11043

An alternative construction using the [[derived algebraic geometry]] of the [[moduli stack of elliptic curves]] is sketched in

* [[Jacob Lurie]], section 5.3 of _[[A Survey of Elliptic Cohomology]]_