
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Fields and quanta
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include fields and quanta - table]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Higgs field_ or _[[Higgs boson]]_ is a [[scalar field|scalar]] [[physical field]]/[[fundamental particle]]  in a [[gauge theory]] such as the [[standard model of particle physics]] supposedly responsible for the [[spontaneously broken symmetry]] of the [[electroweak field]] ([[electroweak symmetry breaking]]) and for giving elementary particles their [[mass|masses]] by the _[[Higgs mechanism]]_. 

## Models

There is no lack of proposals for realizing the Higgs field in various big schemes of mathematical structures modelling physics. 

For instance

* in the [[technicolor]] model the Higgs field is not a fundamental particle but a compound of fermions. This realizes the Higgs effect entirely in ordinary [[gauge theory]]; 

* in [[string theory]] (see _[[string phenomenology]]_) a Higgs can arise in all sorts of ways. Notably in "intersecting brane models" it arises from strings localized at intersecting points (for a typical kind of survey see for instance [around slide 33 here](http://www-tap.scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp/sc2/Kobayashi.pdf#page=33)) 

* in [[noncommutative geometry]] it has been [shown](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/standard+model+of+particle+physics#NCGeometry) that the Higgs may be modeled as a component of the gauge bosons assuming that the [[Kaluza-Klein mechanism|KK-reduction]] is over a certain non-commutative space of classical dimension 0.

## History

The Higgs mechanism was proposed in 1963-1964 by a fair number of authors essentially simultaneously, see the [References](#References) below. The explicit prediction of the Higgs boson implied by this mechanism though seems to be solely due to ([Higgs 64](#Higgs64)).

The Higgs boson (or at least something very much like it) was finally detected in 2013 at the [[LHC]] [[experiment]].

So for the Higgs particle prediction and experimental detection lie apart by about 50 years. Compare maybe to the [[neutrino]], which was predicted in 1930 and detected in 1956, about 26 years later. 

## Related concepts

* [[electroweak field]]

* [[higgsino]]

* [[Higgs bundle]]

[[!include standard model of fundamental physics - table]]


## References
 {#References}


The original articles explaining what is now called the Higgs mechanism by [[spontaneous symmetry breaking]] were

* P. Anderson, _Plasmons, gauge invariance and mass_, Physical Review 130: 439. (1963)

* [[François Englert]], [[Robert Brout]],  _Broken Symmetry and the Mass of Gauge Vector Mesons_, Physical Review Letters 13 (9): 321–23. (1964)

*  Gerald Guralnik, C. R. Hagen, ; T. W. B. Kibble, _Global Conservation Laws and Massless Particles_ Physical Review  (1964)

* {#Higgs64} [[Peter Higgs]], _Broken Symmetries and the Masses of Gauge Bosons_, Physical Review Letters 13 (16): 508–509. (1964)
  

While all these articles essentially describe the Higgs mechanism, appearently only the one by Peter Higgs explicitly points out that this mechanism predicts the existence of a new, then unobserved, boson, the one therefore now called the _Higgs boson_.


The general theory of [[spontaneous symmetry breaking]] is reviewed in

* Jeremy Bernstein, _Spontaneous symmetry breaking, gauge theories, the Higgs mechanism and all that_, Rev. Mod. Phys. 46, 7–48 (1974)  ([pdf](http://www.calstatela.edu/faculty/kaniol/p544/rmp46_p7_higgs_goldstone.pdf))

The [[phenomenology]] of Higgs [[model (in particle physics)|models]] is discussed in 

* Marcela Carena, Howard E. Haber, _Higgs Boson Theory and Phenomenology_, Prog.Part.Nucl.Phys.50:63-152,2003 ([arXiv:hep-ph/0208209](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0208209))

Discussion of the apparent metastability implied by the observed Higss mass includes

* Dario Buttazzo, Giuseppe Degrassi, Pier Paolo Giardino, [[Gian Giudice]], Filippo Sala, Alberto Salvio, Alessandro Strumia, _Investigating the near-criticality of the Higgs boson_ ([arXiv:1307.3536](https://arxiv.org/abs/1307.3536))

Discussion of the Higgs mechanism in the [[G2-MSSM]] and related models is due to

* {#Kane11} [[Gordon Kane]], _String theory and generic predictions for our world – superpartner masses, LHC signatures, dark matter, EWSB, cosmological history of universe, etc_, talk at String phenomenology 2011, August 2011 ([pdf](http://conferencing.uwex.edu/conferences/stringpheno2011/documents/kane.pdf))

* [[Gordon Kane]], Piyush Kumar, Ran Lu, Bob Zheng, _Higgs Mass Prediction for Realistic String/M Theory Vacua_, Phys. Rev. D 85, 075026 ([arXiv:1112.1059](http://arxiv.org/abs/1112.1059))

(a useful informed comment is [here](http://www.math.columbia.edu/~woit/wordpress/?p=4262&cpage=1#comment-101525))


[[!redirects Higgs fields]]

[[!redirects Higgs mechanism]]
[[!redirects Higgs mechanism]]

[[!redirects Higgs effect]]
[[!redirects Higgs effects]]


[[!redirects Higgs particle]]
[[!redirects Higgs particles]]

