
__Material set theory__ (also called _membership-based set
theory_) is a style of [[set theory]] that contrasts with [[structural set theory]].  In a material set theory, the elements of a set exist independently of that set.

+-- {: .query}
[[Arnold Neumaier]]: The new formulation is not much better.
In any model of any set theory, all sets and all objects exist independently. What you perhaps mean is that, in ZF, one cannot infer from an element to which set it belongs,
while in SEAR, each element is in a unique set.

Also, part of the following discussion is no longer comprehensible in the changed context and should be removed or appropriately shortened.

_Toby_:  I agree with Arnold; I like the criterion of a global membership predicate.  (But you know that by now, Mike.)

I labelled the discussion immediately below, although probably we could get rid of it entirely.  (It\'ll still be in the archived revisions if we need it.)

AN: To understand what was meant, you'd also quote the old context of the discussion.

***

Discussion on earlier version:

[[Arnold Neumaier]]: I doubt that this statement means anything. ZF
has no notion of time, hence nothing exists there before anything
else. In a model of ZF all sets exist simultaneously, and without a
model of ZF no set exists.
Thus the notion of pre-existence might be a property of your private
model of ZF (which apparently has extra accidental structure) but it
is not one of ZF.

Thus I am at a loss to see what this distinguishing feature should
mean. 

[[Todd Trimble]]: It seems clear to me that the preceding paragraphs
are written informally, trying to convey a _feeling_ behind what is
meant (here) by "material" vs. "structural". So the objection about
the formal theory ZF seems improper --- let's give Mike some credit;
he knows very well there's no concept of time in the formal theory. 

By "pre-existing", I think he means that _given_ a bunch of objects,
you can (under pretty general conditions, made precise by ZF for
instance) collect them into a set. He actually said that, I just
noticed. But structural set theories work a bit differently. 

[[Mike Shulman]]: Nothing that is said here has a *precise* meaning. 
We don't have *definitions* of "material set theory" or "structural
set theory"---we don't even have a definition of "set theory"!  These
paragraphs are meant only to give an intuitive understanding. 
Evidently they fail to give you such an understanding, but that
doesn't make them meaningless, since they succeed for some of us.

And no, of course I didn't mean to imply that there is a notion of
"time" in ZF.  Nor do I have a "private model" of ZF (now there's a
meaningless notion if I ever saw one), so I have removed your
subsequent comment referring to it.

Although it occurs to me now that there actually is something kind of
"time-like" in ZF, namely the ordinals that index the cumulative
hierarchy.  One way to state the [[axiom of foundation]] is that all
sets can be built up "in sequence" starting from the empty set.  Of
course there is a circularity here since the "sequence" is transfinite
and the extent of ordinals depends on the extent of sets, but the idea
is there.  However, this is definitely *not* what I meant to imply,
since material set theories can be ill-founded just as well as
well-founded, and an ill-founded set such as $x= \{x\}$ really can't
be thought of in any sense as "constructed from pre-existing
elements."  So I've removed that phrase.
=--

Frequently in material set theory one takes everything to be a [[pure
set]], including the elements of sets themselves.   Therefore, any two
sets may be meaningfully compared to ask if they are [[equal]] or if
one is a member of the other.  As a slight variation (still material
set theory), one may also accept ur-elements (or atoms) as elements. 
The main distinguishing feature of a material set theory is a global
membership predicate, whereby it is meaningful to ask, given any
object and a set, whether the object is an element of the set.

+-- {: .query}
[[Arnold Neumaier]]: Here is a second attempt to define the
distinguishing feature. is that supposed to be an equivalent form of
the previous one, or a different one? 
What if only one of the features are present? 

[[Todd Trimble]]: If I may presume to speak again before Mike, I
gather that he is elaborating on what the sorts of (informal)
collecting-into-sets operations typical for the spirit of material set
theory would entail for the basic _shape_ or form that the axiomatic
theories actually take. In other words, to axiomatize those sorts of
operations, one needs to posit a global membership relation/predicate
-- at least that's the case for all such known theories. 

_Toby_:  I like the latter 'distinguishing feature', so much that I\'m
surprised that I didn\'t write it myself!  All that stuff about time
is just a metaphor.

[[Mike Shulman]]: Sorry about using the phrase "distinguishing
feature" twice; I guess I didn't proofread carefully enough.  The
problem is that none of these is really completely satisfactory; I
don't think a material set theory really needs *a priori* to have a
*global* membership predicate in the sense of applying to all
conceievable things, although most well-known material set theories do
so.  I'm still mulling over whether there is a better way to define
these ideas.  If anyone else has a way to phrase them better, be my
guest.

_Toby_:  How about 'global' extending at least to other sets?  A set theory is material if, given any two sets $A$ and $B$ in the theory, there is a proposition $A \in B$ in the theory (with the intended meaning that $A$ is a member of $B$).  I said something pretty similar [here](http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/09/towards_a_computeraided_system.html#c027288).

[[Mike Shulman]]: I don't think a material set theory necessarily even needs to allow sets to be elements of other sets.  I would be more inclined to define it in terms of whether an element of one set can be equal to an element of another set.

I just had a go at giving a more logic-oriented definition of "structural" at [[structural set theory]], which seemed more amenable to definition than "material."  Do you think a theory can be both structural and material?  If not, then "material" can just be defined as "not structural."

_Toby_:  I don\'t like that, because I think that you *can* have, in a structural set theory, sets $A$ and $B$ that are not given by syntactically identical (or even interconvertible) terms (which is how I interpret your 'one set [...] another set'), with $x$ an element of $A$ and $y$ and element of $B$, where $x = y$ is a meaningful proposition, perhaps even true.  You just have to define what it means.  In the case of SEAR (and perhaps even more so for SEPS), I think that it would be very natural to use a conservative extension in which $x = y$ is meaningful whenever $A$ is a set, $x$ is an element of $A$, $\phi$ is a subset of $A$, and $y$ is an element of $|\phi|$.  (This would have an axiom that $x = y$ in this context is true if and only if $x = q_\phi(y)$ in the ordinary sense.)  You could argue that ‘$=$’ here doesn\'t really literally mean equality, but how do you determine that?

More generally, I think that one should be able to use subtypes without becoming material.  (And the extension of SEAR above does satisfy your definition of a structural set theory.)

As for whether a set theory can be both material and structural, I would expect some particularly degenerate examples to be both, and I would also expect it possible to create a hybrid version which is neither.  I see these concepts more as orthogonal complements than as logical complements.

JCMcKeown: would anyone contemplate the desired sense of _material_ perhaps consisting in the presence of a _global subset_ relation, w.r.t. which a universe may or may not have binary/nonempty limits? I only mention it because [algebraic set theory](http://www.phil.cmu.edu/projects/ast/) is still floating around my head --- that, and I'm perfectly happy in universe with as many atoms as sets, irrelevant as that sounds.

For other things... 
perhaps it's my love of concreteness (or semantic games), but suppose $V$ is a model of ZF+(Goedel's completeness theorem); and suppose $V$ believes that $m=(M,\equiv,\dots)$ is a model of SEAR or SEPS, or whatever.  Is it possible that we have things $x,y,\phi,...$ as above, that $V\models x\neq y$ and $m\models x\equiv y$? Is it possible to have things the other way around? That is, is it possible that $V\models x=y$, and yet that for structural purposes this is just a distraction?
=--


[[!redirects material set theory]]
[[!redirects material set theories]]
