
> under construction

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--

=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[action functional]] of the [[type II superstring]] [[sigma-model]] for [[open strings]] ending on [[D-branes]] is, without further conditions, not globally well defined: it is a [[section]] of a possibly non-trivial [[line bundle]] over the configuration space, instead of a plain function. The non-triviality of this line bundle (as a line bundle [[connection on a bundle|with connection]]) is the _Freed-Witten [[quantum anomaly]]_. The necessary conditions for this anomaly to vanish, hence for this line bundle to be trivializable, are the _Freed-Witten anomaly cancellation conditions_.

## Details

... for the moment see the discussion at [[twisted spin^c structure]].

## References

The special case where the class of the restriction of the [[B-field]] to the D-brane _equals_ the third [[integral Stiefel-Whitney class]] of the D-brane was discussed in

* [[Daniel Freed]], [[Edward Witten]], _Anomalies in String Theory with D-Branes_ ([arXiv:hep-th/9907189](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9907189))

The generalization to the case that the two classes differ by a [[torsion]] class was considered in

* [[Anton Kapustin]], _D-branes in a topologically nontrivial B-field_ , Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.
4, no. 1, pp. 127–154 (2000), ([arXiv:hep-th/9909089](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9909089))

A clean formulation and review is provided in

* Loriano Bonora, Fabio Ferrari Ruffino, Raffaele Savelli, _Classifying A-field and B-field configurations in the presence of D-branes_ ([arXiv:0810.4291](http://arxiv.org/abs/0810.4291))

* Fabio Ferrari Ruffino, _Classifying A-field and B-field configurations in the presence of D-branes - Part II: Stacks of D-branes_ ([arXiv:1104.2798](http://arxiv.org/abs/1104.2798))

* Fabio Ferrari Ruffino, _Topics on topology and superstring theory_ ([arXiv:0910.4524](http://arxiv.org/abs/0910.4524))

and

* Kim Laine, _Geometric and topological aspects of Type IIB D-branes_ ([arXiv:0912.0460](http://arxiv.org/abs/0912.0460))
 {#Laine}

In ([Laine](#Laine)) the discussion of FW-anomaly cancellation with finite-rank gauge bundles is towards the very end, culminating in equation (3.41).

[[!redirects Freed-Witten anomaly cancellation]]

[[!redirects Freed-Witten quantum anomaly]]
[[!redirects Freed-Witten quantum anomaly cancellation]]
