
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _$G_2$-MSSM_ is an [[MSSM]] [[model (in particle physics)]] motivated from [[Kaluza-Klein mechanism|compactification]] of [[M-theory]] on a 7-dimensional singular [[G2-manifold]], hence a model in [[string phenomenology]]: [[M-theory on G2-manifolds]].

The G2-MSSM is derived in the context of [[effective QFT|effective]] [[N=1 D=4 supergravity]]. The model is not based on a specific example of a [[G2 manifold]] but rather, it relies on the most general known properties of [[G2 compactifications of M-theory]]. For example, the Kähler potential is taken to be of the most general form consistent with 
[[G2]] [[holonomy]]. Unlike [[Calabi-Yau manifold]] compactifications of [[string theory]] where one must [[moduli stabilization|stabilize]] different classes of moduli, which often require a different [[moduli stabilization|stabilization]] mechanism for each class, in $G_2$ compactifications of [[M-theory]] all the geometric moduli are on an equal footing. In other words, there is only one class of moduli - the [[periods]] of the [[associative 3-form]] over the basis 3-[[cycles]]. Furthermore, each geometric modulus is paired up with an [[axion|axionic]] partner to form [[complex scalar fields]], which possess a PQ-type shift symmetry. This symmetry originates from the [[gauge symmetry]] of the [[supergravity C-field]] in [[11-dimensional supergravity]]. The shift symmetry is exact to all orders in [[perturbation theory]] and can only be [[broken symmetry|broken]] by non-perturbative effects. Therefore, in the absence of [[fluxes]] the [[superpotential]] in the corresponding [[N=1 d=4 supergravity]] is purely non-perturbative. This unique feature of the superpotential in [[G2 compactifications of M-theory]] provides a natural mechanism to generate the hierarchy between the [[Planck scale]] and the scale of supersymmetry breaking, and ultimately the [[electroweak field|electroweak]] breaking scale in the context of the G2-MSSM.

Another crucial feature that distinguishes the G2-MSSM from other known scenarios is the exponentially large split between masses of the geometric moduli and their axionic partners once the moduli are stabilized. This happens because the two dominant terms in the superpotential depend only on a single linear combination of all the moduli. This linear combination represents the volume of an associative three-cycle that supports the hidden sector non-Abelian gauge theory, which is taken to be [[Poincare duality|Poincare dual]] (up to a positive real number) to the co-associative four-form of the $G_2$-manifold. Therefore, the model not only provides a natural [[QCD]] [[axion]] candidate, but also explicitly realizes the [[String Axiverse scenario]] proposed by Arvanitaki et.al. Incidentally, this very feature of the superpotential ultimately explains the absence of large CP-violating phases in the soft supersymmetry breaking terms.

Another distinctive feature of the G2-MSSM is a slightly split spectrum of superpartners. The [[gaugino]] masses are suppressed relative to the gravitino mass by a factor of $\mathcal{O}(60)$ due to the dynamics of the moduli stabilization. On the other hand, the scalar masses and the trilinear couplings are as heavy as the [[gravitino]] mass. The [[higgsinos]] may or may not be suppressed relative to the gravitino mass depending on the details of the solution to the doublet-triple splitting problem. 

Apart from the very specific form of the soft terms, the difference between the G2-MSSM and a generic bottom-up Split Supersymmetry scenario is that in Split SUSY both gaugino masses and trilinear couplings are protected by an [[R-symmetry]] and therefore remain light, while the scalar masses can be as heavy as the [[GUT]] scale. 

The slightly split G2-MSSM spectrum naturally accommodates the [[Higgs particle]] at the observed [[energy]] of around 125 GeV together with reasonable [[dark matter]] candidates in the form of axions and/or W-ino [[WIMPs]], which are generated non-thermally via late-time moduli decays.

## Related concepts

* [[G2]], [[G2-manifold]]

* [[M-theory on G2-manifolds]]

## References

A comprehensive account is in 

* [[Bobby Acharya]], Konstantin Bobkov, [[Gordon Kane]], [[Piyush Kumar]], Jing Shao, _The $G_2$-MSSM - An $M$ Theory motivated model of Particle Physics_ ([arXiv:0801.0478](http://arxiv.org/abs/0801.0478))

Original articles include

* [[Bobby Acharya]], Konstantin Bobkov, [[Gordon Kane]], [[Piyush Kumar]], Jing Shao, _Explaining the Electroweak Scale and Stabilizing Moduli in M Theory_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0701034](http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0701034)) 

* [[Bobby Acharya]], Konstantin Bobkov, [[Gordon Kane]], [[Piyush Kumar]], Diana Vaman, _An M theory Solution to the Hierarchy Problem_ ([arXiv:hep-th/0606262](http://arxiv.org/abs/hepth/0606262))

* [[Bobby Acharya]], Konstantin Bobkov, _Kähler Independence of the $G_2$-MSSM_, JHEP ([arXiv:0810.3285](http://arxiv.org/abs/0810.3285))

A review of the specific phenomenological properties is in 

* [[Bobby Acharya]], [[Gordon Kane]], Piyush Kumar, _Compactified String Theories -- Generic Predictions for Particle Physics_,  Int. J. Mod. Phys. A, Volume 27 (2012) 1230012 ([arXiv:1204.2795](http://arxiv.org/abs/1204.2795))

Discussion of the [[Higgs mechanism]] in this model includes

* {#Kane11} [[Gordon Kane]], _String theory and generic predictions for our world – superpartner masses, LHC signatures, dark matter, EWSB, cosmological history of universe, etc_, talk at String phenomenology 2011, August 2011 ([pdf](http://conferencing.uwex.edu/conferences/stringpheno2011/documents/kane.pdf))

* [[Gordon Kane]], Piyush Kumar, Ran Lu, Bob Zheng, _Higgs Mass Prediction for Realistic String/M Theory Vacua_, Phys. Rev. D 85, 075026 ([arXiv:1112.1059](http://arxiv.org/abs/1112.1059))

(a useful informed comment is [here](http://www.math.columbia.edu/~woit/wordpress/?p=4262&cpage=1#comment-101525))

More recent predictions are in

* {#EllisKaneZheng014} Sebastian A.R. Ellis, [[Gordon Kane]], Bob Zheng, _Superpartners at LHC and Future Colliders: Predictions from Constrained Compactified M-Theory_ ([arXiv:1408.1961](http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.1961))