pages/8175.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence_ is a kind of [[spectral sequence]] that generalizes the [[Serre spectral sequence]] from [[ordinary cohomology]] $H^\bullet$ to any [[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]] theory $E^\bullet$.

For any [[homotopy fiber sequence]]

$$
  \array{
    F &\longrightarrow& P
    \\
    && \downarrow
    \\
    && X
  }
$$

then the corresponding $E$-Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence has on its second page the [[ordinary cohomology]] of $X$ with [[coefficients]] in the $E$-[[cohomology groups]] of the [[fiber]] and coverges to the proper $E$-cohomology of the total space:

$$
  E_2^{p,q} =
  H^p(X,E^q(F))
  \Rightarrow
  E^{\bullet}(P)
  \,.
$$

This is of interest already for $F \simeq \ast$, as then it expresses generalized cohomology in terms of cordinary cohomology with coefficients in the base cohomology ring.

There is a generalization to [[equivariant cohomology theory]] ([Davis-Lueck 98, theorem 4.7](#DavisLueck98)).

For [[genuine G-spectrum|genuine G-equivariance]], with [[RO(G)-grading]] for [[representation spheres]] $S^V$, then for $P \to X$ an $F$-fibration of [[topological G-spaces]] and for $A$ any $G$-[[Mackey functor]], the equivariant Serre spectral sequence looks like ([Kronholm 10, theorem 3.1](#Kronholm10)):

$$
  E_2^{p,q} = H^p(X, H^{V+q}(F,A)) \,\Rightarrow\, H^{V+p+q}(P,A)
  \,,
$$

where on the left in the $E_2$-page we have [[ordinary cohomology]] with [[coefficients]] in the genuine equivariant cohomology groups of the fiber.


## Examples

### For K-theory
 {#ForKTheory}

For $E = $ [[KU]], hence for [[topological K-theory]], the differential $d_3$ of the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence with $F = \ast$ is given by a [[Steenrod square]] operation

$$
  d_3 = Sq^3
$$

([Atiyah-Hirzebruch 61](#AtiyahHirzebruch61)).

For [[twisted K-theory]] this picks up in addition the [[cup product]] with the 3-class $H$ of the twist:

$$
  d_3 = Sq^3 + H \cup(-)
$$

([Rosenberg 82](#Rosenberg82), [Atiyah-Segal 05 (4.1)](#AtiyahSegal05)). The higher differentials $d_5$ and $d_7$ here are given by higher [[Massey products]] with the twisting class ([Atiyah-Segal 05 sections 5-7](#AtiyahSegal05)).


## Applications

### D-brane charges in string theory
 {#ApplicationDBraneChargesInStringTheory}

In [[string theory]] [[D-brane charges]] are classes in $E = KU$-cohomology, i.e. in [[K-theory]]. The second page of of the corresponding Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence (see [above](#ForKTheory)) for $F = \ast$ hence expresses ordinary cohomology in all even or all odd degrees, and being in the kernel of all the differentials is hence the constraint on such ordinary cohomology data to lift to genuine K-theory classes, hence to genuine D-brane charges. In this way the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequences is used in ([Maldacena-Moore-Seiberg 01](#MaldacenaMooreSeiberg01), [Evslin-Sati 06](#EvslinSati06))

## Related concepts

[[!include Lurie spectral sequences -- table]]

## References

### General

The original article with application to [[K-theory]] is

* {#AtiyahHirzebruch61} [[M. F. Atiyah]], [[F. Hirzebruch]], _Vector bundles and homogeneous spaces_, 1961, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. III pp. 7–38 American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., [MR 0139181](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=0139181)

and further discussion of the case of [[twisted K-theory]] is due to

* {#Rosenberg82} [[Jonathan Rosenberg]], _Homological Invariants of Extensions of $C^\ast$-algebras_, Proc. Symp. Pure Math 38 (1982) 35.

* {#AtiyahSegal05} [[Michael Atiyah]], [[Graeme Segal]], _Twisted K-theory and cohomology_, Nankai Tracts Math. 11, World Sci. Publ., Hackensack, NJ, pp. 5–43,  ([arXiv:math/0510674](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0510674))

### Equivariant version
 {#EquivariantVersion}

Discussion of the AHSS in [[Bredon cohomology|Bredon]] [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]]/[[equivariant cohomology]] includes

* {#DavisLueck98} [[James Davis]], [[Wolfgang Lueck]], _Spaces over a category and assembly maps in isomorphism conjectures in K- and L-theory_, K-Theory 15: 201–252, 1998 ([pdf](http://www.indiana.edu/~jfdavis/papers/assembly.pdf), [K-Theory archive](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/K-theory/0131/))

Discussion in genuine equivariant cohomology, i.e. including [[RO(G)-grading]], is in

* {#Kronholm10} [[William Kronholm]], _The $RO(G)$-graded Serre spectral sequence_, Homology Homotopy Appl. Volume 12, Number 1 (2010), 75-92. ([pdf](http://www.swarthmore.edu/NatSci/wkronho1/serre.pdf), [Euclid](https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.hha/1296223823))



### Examples

Application for the case of [[K-theory]] to [[D-brane charges]] in [[string theory]] is discussed in

* {#MaldacenaMooreSeiberg01} [[Juan Maldacena]], [[Gregory Moore]], [[Nathan Seiberg]], _D-Brane Instantons and K-Theory Charges_, JHEP 0111:062,2001 ([arXiv:hep-th/0108100](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0108100))

* {#EvslinSati06} [[Jarah Evslin]], [[Hisham Sati]], _Can D-Branes Wrap Nonrepresentable Cycles?_, JHEP0610:050,2006 ([arXiv:hep-th/0607045](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0607045))

and detailed review of this is in 

* [[Fabio Ruffino]], _Topics on topology and superstring theory_ ([arXiv:0910.4524](http://arxiv.org/abs/0910.4524))

Discussion for the $\mathbb{Z}/2$-equivariant [[KR cohomology theory]] (relevant for D-branes in [[orientifolds]]) includes

* [[Daniel Dugger]], _An Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence for KR-theory_ ([arXiv:math/0304099](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0304099)

Discussion for the case of [[Morava K-theory]] and [[Morava E-theory]] with comments on application to charges of [[M-branes]] is in 

* {#SatiWesterland11} [[Hisham Sati]], [[Craig Westerland]], _Twisted Morava K-theory and E-theory_ ([arXiv:1109.3867](http://arxiv.org/abs/1109.3867))

Application to [[motivic homotopy theory|motivic]] [[cobordism cohomology theory]] is discussed in

* Nobuaki Yagita, _Applications of the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequences for motivic cobordisms_ ([pdf](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/K-theory/0627/ah.pdf))



[[!redirects Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence]]

[[!redirects Atiyah-Hirzeburch spectral sequence]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 105249 Revision date: 2016-02-05 10:32:22 Page name: Atiyah–Hirzebruch spectral sequence Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 89.204.137.52

pages/8175.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
#### Cohomology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include cohomology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence_ is a kind of [[spectral sequence]] that generalizes the [[Serre spectral sequence]] from [[ordinary cohomology]] $H^\bullet$ to any [[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]] theory $E^\bullet$.

For any [[homotopy fiber sequence]]

$$
  \array{
    F &\longrightarrow& P
    \\
    && \downarrow
    \\
    && X
  }
$$

then the corresponding $E$-Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence has on its second page the [[ordinary cohomology]] of $X$ with [[coefficients]] in the $E$-[[cohomology groups]] of the [[fiber]] and coverges to the proper $E$-cohomology of the total space:

$$
  E_2^{p,q} =
  H^p(X,E^q(F))
  \Rightarrow
  E^{\bullet}(P)
  \,.
$$

This is of interest already for $F \simeq \ast$, as then it expresses generalized cohomology in terms of cordinary cohomology with coefficients in the base cohomology ring.

There is a generalization to [[equivariant cohomology theory]] ([Davis-Lueck 98, theorem 4.7](#DavisLueck98)).

For [[genuine G-spectrum|genuine G-equivariance]], with [[RO(G)-grading]] for [[representation spheres]] $S^V$, then for $P \to X$ an $F$-fibration of [[topological G-spaces]] and for $A$ any $G$-[[Mackey functor]], the equivariant Serre spectral sequence looks like ([Kronholm 10, theorem 3.1](#Kronholm10)):

$$
  E_2^{p,q} = H^p(X, H^{V+q}(F,A)) \,\Rightarrow\, H^{V+p+q}(P,A)
  \,,
$$

where on the left in the $E_2$-page we have [[ordinary cohomology]] with [[coefficients]] in the genuine equivariant cohomology groups of the fiber.


## Examples

### For K-theory
 {#ForKTheory}

For $E = $ [[KU]], hence for [[topological K-theory]], the differential $d_3$ of the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence with $F = \ast$ is given by a [[Steenrod square]] operation

$$
  d_3 = Sq^3
$$

([Atiyah-Hirzebruch 61](#AtiyahHirzebruch61)).

For [[twisted K-theory]] this picks up in addition the [[cup product]] with the 3-class $H$ of the twist:

$$
  d_3 = Sq^3 + H \cup(-)
$$

([Rosenberg 82](#Rosenberg82), [Atiyah-Segal 05 (4.1)](#AtiyahSegal05)). The higher differentials $d_5$ and $d_7$ here are given by higher [[Massey products]] with the twisting class ([Atiyah-Segal 05 sections 5-7](#AtiyahSegal05)).


## Applications

### D-brane charges in string theory
 {#ApplicationDBraneChargesInStringTheory}

In [[string theory]] [[D-brane charges]] are classes in $E = KU$-cohomology, i.e. in [[K-theory]]. The second page of of the corresponding Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence (see [above](#ForKTheory)) for $F = \ast$ hence expresses ordinary cohomology in all even or all odd degrees, and being in the kernel of all the differentials is hence the constraint on such ordinary cohomology data to lift to genuine K-theory classes, hence to genuine D-brane charges. In this way the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequences is used in ([Maldacena-Moore-Seiberg 01](#MaldacenaMooreSeiberg01), [Evslin-Sati 06](#EvslinSati06))

## Related concepts

[[!include Lurie spectral sequences -- table]]

## References

### General

The concept first appears in print (with application to [[K-theory]]) in

* {#AtiyahHirzebruch61} [[M. F. Atiyah]], [[F. Hirzebruch]], _Vector bundles and homogeneous spaces_, 1961, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. III pp. 7–38 American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., [MR 0139181](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=0139181)

Early lecture notes include

* {#Adams74} [[Frank Adams]], part III section 7 of _[[Stable homotopy and generalised homology]]_, 1974

There it says:

> These spectral sequences were probably first invented by [[George Whitehead|G. Whitehead]], but he got them just after he wrote the paper $[$Whitehead 56 'Homotopy groups of joins and unions'$]$ in which they ought to have appeared. They then became a folk-theorem and were eventually published by Atiyah and Hirzebruch ([Adams 74, p. 215](#Adams74))

Further discussion of the case of [[twisted K-theory]] is due to

* {#Rosenberg82} [[Jonathan Rosenberg]], _Homological Invariants of Extensions of $C^\ast$-algebras_, Proc. Symp. Pure Math 38 (1982) 35.

* {#AtiyahSegal05} [[Michael Atiyah]], [[Graeme Segal]], _Twisted K-theory and cohomology_, Nankai Tracts Math. 11, World Sci. Publ., Hackensack, NJ, pp. 5–43,  ([arXiv:math/0510674](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0510674))

### Equivariant version
 {#EquivariantVersion}

Discussion of the AHSS in [[Bredon cohomology|Bredon]] [[equivariant stable homotopy theory]]/[[equivariant cohomology]] includes

* {#DavisLueck98} [[James Davis]], [[Wolfgang Lueck]], _Spaces over a category and assembly maps in isomorphism conjectures in K- and L-theory_, K-Theory 15: 201–252, 1998 ([pdf](http://www.indiana.edu/~jfdavis/papers/assembly.pdf), [K-Theory archive](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/K-theory/0131/))

Discussion in genuine equivariant cohomology, i.e. including [[RO(G)-grading]], is in

* {#Kronholm10} [[William Kronholm]], _The $RO(G)$-graded Serre spectral sequence_, Homology Homotopy Appl. Volume 12, Number 1 (2010), 75-92. ([pdf](http://www.swarthmore.edu/NatSci/wkronho1/serre.pdf), [Euclid](https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.hha/1296223823))



### Examples

Application for the case of [[K-theory]] to [[D-brane charges]] in [[string theory]] is discussed in

* {#MaldacenaMooreSeiberg01} [[Juan Maldacena]], [[Gregory Moore]], [[Nathan Seiberg]], _D-Brane Instantons and K-Theory Charges_, JHEP 0111:062,2001 ([arXiv:hep-th/0108100](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0108100))

* {#EvslinSati06} [[Jarah Evslin]], [[Hisham Sati]], _Can D-Branes Wrap Nonrepresentable Cycles?_, JHEP0610:050,2006 ([arXiv:hep-th/0607045](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0607045))

and detailed review of this is in 

* [[Fabio Ruffino]], _Topics on topology and superstring theory_ ([arXiv:0910.4524](http://arxiv.org/abs/0910.4524))

Discussion for the $\mathbb{Z}/2$-equivariant [[KR cohomology theory]] (relevant for D-branes in [[orientifolds]]) includes

* [[Daniel Dugger]], _An Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence for KR-theory_ ([arXiv:math/0304099](http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0304099)

Discussion for the case of [[Morava K-theory]] and [[Morava E-theory]] with comments on application to charges of [[M-branes]] is in 

* {#SatiWesterland11} [[Hisham Sati]], [[Craig Westerland]], _Twisted Morava K-theory and E-theory_ ([arXiv:1109.3867](http://arxiv.org/abs/1109.3867))

Application to [[motivic homotopy theory|motivic]] [[cobordism cohomology theory]] is discussed in

* Nobuaki Yagita, _Applications of the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequences for motivic cobordisms_ ([pdf](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/K-theory/0627/ah.pdf))



[[!redirects Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence]]

[[!redirects Atiyah-Hirzeburch spectral sequence]]
