pages/8176.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Serre spectral sequence_ or _Leray-Serre spectral sequence_
is a [[spectral sequence]] for computation of [[singular homology]] of [[topological spaces]] in a [[Serre fibration|Serre]]-[[fiber sequence]] of [[topological spaces]].

Given a [[homotopy fiber sequence]]

$$
  \array{
     F &\longrightarrow& E
     \\
     && \downarrow
     \\
     && X
  }
$$

the the corresponding cohomology Serre spectral sequence looks like

$$
  E_2^{p,q}= H^p(X, H^q(F)) \Rightarrow H^{p+q}(E)
  \,.
$$

The generalization of this from [[ordinary cohomology]] to [[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]] is the _[[Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence]]_.

## References

The original article is 

* [[Jean-Pierre Serre]], _Homologie singuli&eacute;re des espaces fibr&eacute;s_ Applications, Ann. of Math. 54 (1951), 

A textbook account is for instance in

* [[Alan Hatcher]], _[Spectral sequences in algebraic topology](http://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/SSAT/SSATpage.html)_ _I: The Serre spectral sequence_ ([pdf](http://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/SSAT/SSch1.pdf))

Lecture notes etc. includes

* [[Greg Friedman]], _Some extremely brief notes on the Leray spectral sequence_ ([pdf](http://faculty.tcu.edu/richardson/Seminars/Gregspecseq.pdf))

Discussion in [[homotopy type theory]] includes

* [[Mike Shulman]], _[Spectral Sequences](http://homotopytypetheory.org/2013/08/08/spectral-sequences/)_, 2013

[[!redirects Serre spectral sequences]]

[[!redirects Leray-Serre spectral sequence]]
[[!redirects Leray-Serre spectral sequences]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 103493 Revision date: 2015-12-08 16:49:54 Page name: Serre spectral sequence Author: Urs Schreiber IP address: 78.104.9.228

pages/8176.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Homological algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include homological algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Serre spectral sequence_ or _Leray-Serre spectral sequence_
is a [[spectral sequence]] for computation of [[singular homology]] of [[topological spaces]] in a [[Serre fibration|Serre]]-[[fiber sequence]] of [[topological spaces]].

Given a [[homotopy fiber sequence]]

$$
  \array{
     F &\longrightarrow& E
     \\
     && \downarrow
     \\
     && X
  }
$$

the the corresponding cohomology Serre spectral sequence looks like

$$
  E_2^{p,q}= H^p(X, H^q(F)) \Rightarrow H^{p+q}(E)
  \,.
$$

The generalization of this from [[ordinary cohomology]] to [[generalized (Eilenberg-Steenrod) cohomology]] is the _[[Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence]]_.

## References

### General

The original article is 

* [[Jean-Pierre Serre]], _Homologie singuli&eacute;re des espaces fibr&eacute;s_ Applications, Ann. of Math. 54 (1951), 

A textbook account is for instance in

* [[Alan Hatcher]], _[Spectral sequences in algebraic topology](http://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/SSAT/SSATpage.html)_ _I: The Serre spectral sequence_ ([pdf](http://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/SSAT/SSch1.pdf))

Lecture notes etc. includes

* [[Greg Friedman]], _Some extremely brief notes on the Leray spectral sequence_ ([pdf](http://faculty.tcu.edu/richardson/Seminars/Gregspecseq.pdf))

Discussion in [[homotopy type theory]] includes

* [[Mike Shulman]], _[Spectral Sequences](http://homotopytypetheory.org/2013/08/08/spectral-sequences/)_, 2013

### In equivariant cohomology

In [[equivariant cohomology]], for [[Bredon cohomology]]:

* [[Ieke Moerdijk]], J.-A. Svensson, _The Equivariant Serre Spectral Sequence_, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society Vol. 118, No. 1 (May, 1993), pp. 263-278 ([JSTOR](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2160037))

and for genuine equivariant cohomology, i.e. with [[RO(G)-grading]]:

* William Kronholm, _The $RO(G)$-graded Serre spectral sequence_ ([pdf](http://www.swarthmore.edu/NatSci/wkronho1/serre.pdf))


[[!redirects Serre spectral sequences]]

[[!redirects Leray-Serre spectral sequence]]
[[!redirects Leray-Serre spectral sequences]]
