

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Graph theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include graph theory - contents]]
=--
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


# Contents
* table of contents 
{: toc}

## Introduction 

Both [[category theory]] and [[graph theory]] study patterns based on [[diagrams]] consisting of nodes and edges. Despite this surface impression, there is in fact very little interaction between the scientific communities of category theorists and of graph theorists. 

This article is a modest bridge, indicating that the _[[category]] of [[graphs]]_ (in the usual graph-theorist's sense -- see for example [Diestel](#Diestel)) has some very nice properties. 


## Simple graphs as relations 

By a **simple [[graph]]**, we mean a [[set]] $V$ whose elements are called *vertices*, together with a collection of 2-element subsets $\{x, y\}$ of $V$; these are called *edges* of the graph. 

There are various ways of forming a category of simple graphs. Perhaps the most straightforward is to define a morphism of graphs $G \to H$ to be a function $f: V \to W$ between the vertex sets to be a graph morphism if $\{f(x), f(y)\}$ is an edge of $H$ whenever $\{x, y\}$ is an edge of $G$. 

Another option -- and this is the one chosen for this article -- starts by regarding a simple graph as carrying the same information as a set $V$ equipped with a [[symmetric relation|symmetric]] [[reflexive relation|reflexive]] [[relation]] $E$. Indeed, such a relation determines (and is uniquely determined by) a simple graph $G$ where for given vertices $x, y \in V$, there is an edge $\{x, y\}$ between $x$ and $y$ in $G$ iff both $(x, y) \in E$ and $x \neq y$. We will write $E(x, y)$ to mean $(x, y) \in E$. 

Then, under the relational formulation, we define a morphism $(V, E) \to (W, F)$ between simple graphs straightforwardly[^1] as a function $f: V \to W$ that preserves the relevant structure, i.e., that $E(x, y)$ implies $F(f(x), f(y))$. One reason for preferring this notion of morphism is that it allows, for example, consideration of arbitrary edge contractions of a simple graph as [[quotients]] in the category (cf. [[graph minor]]), something that is not possible under the prior notion of morphism. 

[^1]: In other words, the usual notion of morphism between structures or models as in [[model theory]]. 

Thus we will adopt the latter notion of morphism which takes reflexive symmetric relations $E$ as primary. The resulting [[category]] of simple graphs is denoted by $SimpGph$. 

Note that graphs and their morphisms can also be understood in functorial language, by regarding simple graphs as special types of [[presheaves]], as follows. Let $C$ be the category of sets $1 \coloneqq \{\ast\}$ and $2 \coloneqq \{s, t\}$ and functions between them. Then a presheaf $X: C^{op} \to Set$ is given by sets $V = X(1)$ and $E = X(2)$ and maps 

* $d_0: X(2) \stackrel{X(\ast \mapsto s)}{\to} X(1)$ (source map), 

* $d_1 = X(2) \stackrel{X(\ast \mapsto t)}{\to} X(1)$ (target map), 

* $i: X(1) \stackrel{X(s, t \mapsto \ast)}{\to} X(2)$ (cf. reflexivity), 

* $\sigma: X(2) \stackrel{X(s \mapsto t, t \mapsto s)}{\to} X(2)$ (cf. symmetry). 

satisfying appropriate identities imposed by equations in $C$. Simple graphs can then be regarded [[equivalence|equivalently]] as such presheaves where the map 

$$\langle d_0, d_1 \rangle: X(2) \to X(1) \times X(1)$$ 

is a [[monomorphism]]. In that case, a morphism of simple graphs amounts to a [[natural transformation]] between such presheaves. 

### An aside on other notions of graph 

"Simple graph" as defined in the nLab (see [[graph]]) means that edges are 2-element subsets of $V$, but of course that doesn't preclude consideration of other types of graph. One option is to consider sets $V$ equipped with a collection of subsets of $V$ of cardinality either 1 or 2, i.e., allowing some but not necessarily all loops as edges. We don't call those "simple graphs" (at [[graph]] they are called "loop graphs"), but nevertheless they form a respectable category under the straightforward notion of morphism $f$ (if $\{x, y\}$ is an edge of the domain, possibly with $x = y$, then $\{f(x), f(y)\}$ is an edge of the codomain). 


## Properties of $SimpGph$ 

The category $SimpGph$ has very good properties. For example,  

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 
$SimpGph$ is a [[Grothendieck quasitopos]]. In particular, it is a [[regular category]] and even a [[logos]], and $SimpGph^{op}$ is also regular. It is also $\infty$-[[extensive category|extensive]]. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
(See also [Adamek and Herrlich](#AdamHerr).) As above, let $C$ be the category of sets $1$ and $2$ and functions between them, and regard the category of simple graphs as a full subcategory of the presheaf [[topos]] $Set^{C^{op}}$. For this presheaf topos, there is just one nontrivial $\neg\neg$-dense sieve, namely the inclusion 

$$(s, t): C(-, 1) + C(-, 1) \to C(-, 2)$$ 

(where $s$ is shorthand for $C(-, \ast \mapsto s)$ and similarly for $t$) and so the category of $\neg\neg$-[[separated presheaves]] is equivalent to the category of presheaves $X$ such that the induced map 

$$X(2) \cong Set^{C^{op}}(C(-, 2), X) \stackrel{(s, t)^\ast}{\to} Set^{C^{op}}(C(-, 1) + C(-, 1), X) \cong X(1) \times X(1),$$ 

which is the source-target pairing $\langle d_0, d_1 \rangle: X(2) \to X(1) \times X(1)$, is monic. In other words, a simple graph in this language is exactly a separated presheaf. On the other hand, a Grothendieck quasitopos is, essentially by definition, the category of separated presheaves for a topology on a presheaf topos, in this case the $\neg\neg$-topology. 

Being a quasitopos with small coproducts, it is $\infty$-extensive provided that coproducts are disjoint. However, this is trivial to check (it even suffices to check, according to [[Elephant]] 2.6.5, that $0 \to 1$ is a [[regular monomorphism]], or that $1 + 1$ is a disjoint coproduct, which it obviously is). 
=-- 

It is easy to describe [[monomorphism|monos]] and [[epimorphism|epis]] in $SimpGph$. For, let $\Gamma = \hom(1, -): SimpGph \to Set$ be the underlying vertex-set [[forgetful functor]]. 

+-- {: .num_prop} 
###### Proposition 
The forgetful functor $\Gamma = \hom(1, -): SimpGph \to Set$ is faithful, in fact exhibits $SimpGph$ as a [[topological concrete category]]. 
=-- 

We omit the easy proof. Next we have two easy results:  

+-- {: .num_prop} 
###### Proposition 
$\Gamma$ [[reflected limit|reflects]] monos and epis (because $\Gamma$ is faithful). 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_prop} 
###### Proposition 
$\Gamma$ [[preserved limit|preserves]] [[limits]] and [[colimits]] (because it has a [[left adjoint]] $\Delta$ and a [[right adjoint]] $\nabla$). 
=-- 

It follows that $\Gamma: SimpGph \to Set$ both preserves and reflects monos and epis. As a result, we can prove various simple exactness results in $SimpGph$. For instance: 

+-- {: .num_lemma}
###### Lemma 
In $SimpGph$, the [[pushout]] of any mono is a mono. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
Suppose we have a pushout diagram in $SimpGph$: 

$$\array{
G & \to & H \\
 ^\mathllap{mono} \downarrow & & \downarrow^\mathrlap{k} \\ 
G' & \to & H'
}$$ 

Since $\Gamma$ preserves both pushouts and monos, and since the pushout of a mono in $Set$ is a mono, we have that $\Gamma(k)$ is monic in $Set$. Since $\Gamma$ reflects monos, this means $k$ is monic in $SimpGph$. 
=-- 

As already observed, there is a chain of adjoint functors $\Delta \dashv \Gamma \dashv \nabla: Set \to SimpGph$. But in fact there is a fourth functor in the chain: $\Delta$ has a left adjoint $\Pi: SimpGph \to Set$, the [[connected object|connected components]] functor. If $E$ is the simple graph consisting of two vertices $a, b$ with an edge between them, then there is a reflexive fork 

$$a, b: 1 \rightrightarrows E \stackrel{!}{\to} 1$$ 

and $\Pi$ is formed as a [[reflexive coequalizer]] of the induced diagram: 

$$SimpGph(1, -) \to SimpGph(E, -) \rightrightarrows SimpGph(1, -) \to \Pi$$ 

+-- {: .num_prop} 
###### Proposition 
$\Pi \dashv \Delta$, and $\Pi$ preserves products. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
$\Pi$ preserves products because being a reflexive coequalizer, it is a [[sifted colimit]] of product-preserving functors. For graphs $G$, there is a natural map $u G: G \to \Delta \Pi G$ which at the underlying vertex-set level sends a vertex to its connected component; if $S$ is any set, then a graph map $f: G \to \Delta S$ must send any two vertices with an edge between them to the same point, and so $f$ factors as $G \stackrel{u G}{\to} \Delta \Pi G \stackrel{\Delta g}{\to} \Delta S$ for a unique map $g: \Pi G \to S$, and this establishes the adjunction $\Pi \dashv \Delta$. 
=-- 

### Equalizers and coequalizers

If $f, g \colon G \stackrel{\to}{\to} H$ are maps in $SimpGph$, then their [[equalizer]] $Eq(f, g) = i \colon K \to G$ is given at the vertex level by 

$$\Gamma(i) = Eq(\Gamma(f), \Gamma(g))$$ 

and at the edge level by $K(x, y) \Leftrightarrow G(i(x), i(y))$; in other words, if $x, y$ belong to $K$ and there is an edge between them in $G$, then that edge lies in $K$. To express this last condition, we say the subgraph $i$ is _full_ (at the edge level). 

Thus, $i$ is a regular mono in $SimpGph$ iff both $\Gamma(i)$ is monic in $Set$ and $i$ is full at the edge level. 

The [[coequalizer]] of $f$ and $g$, say $Coeq(f, g) = q \colon H \to Q$, is given at the vertex level by 

$$\Gamma(q) = Coeq(\Gamma(f), \Gamma(g))$$ 

and at the edge level by taking the image of the composite $E_H \hookrightarrow Vert(H)^2 \stackrel{q^2}{\to} Vert(Q)^2$, so that 

$$Q(x, y) \Leftrightarrow \exists_{u, v} H(u, v) \wedge q(u) = x \wedge q(v) = y.$$ 

Thus, $q$ is a [[regular epimorphism]] if it is surjective at both the vertex and edge levels. 


### Ternary factorization 

The category of simple graphs has a [[ternary factorization system]] as follows: each morphism $f \colon G \to H$ factors as 

$$G \stackrel{q}{\to} G' \stackrel{a}{\to} H' \stackrel{i}{\to} H$$ 

where 

* $q$ is a surjection between vertex-sets and at the edge level, i.e., is a [[regular epi]]; 

* $a$ induces an identity between vertex-sets (hence is [[bimorphism|jointly monic and epic]]), but without necessarily being full at the edge level; 

* $i$ is given by an injection between vertex-sets and is full at the edge level, and (thus) is a [[regular mono]]. 

The factorization of $f$ into $q$ followed by $i \circ a$ is the (regular epi)-mono factorization, while the factorization of $f$ into $a \circ q$ followed by $i$ is the epi-(regular mono) factorization. To round out
the discussion, we prove that regular monos are stable under pushout (which ensures that the epi-(regular mono) factorization is an [[orthogonal factorization system]]). 

### Three wide subcategories of $SimpGph$

In this section we will analyse and compare three wide subcategories of SimpGph. 
Each is a [[left cancellative category]]. 

In this section,  SimpGph has the same meaning as in the other sections, but there are slight notational variations: 

* $E$ is used like an infix relation-symbol, 
* the sequent-notation $\vdash$, sometimes possibly with [[context]]s given in subscripts, is used for implications. (No confusion with the usual notation for adjoints will be possible.)

We will moreover adhere to the following conventions: 

* the notation $f(v)$ for the value of a set-map  $f$ at an element of its domain is kept separate from the notation $f_\ast(G_0)$ for the image of the graph $G_0$ under the morphism $f$. In particular, if $f\in$Mor(SimGph) and $G_0\in$Ob(SimGph), we consider the expression $f(G_0)$ to be undefined.
* the usual graph-theoretic distance-function is denoted by $\mathrm{dist}_{(V,E)}\colon V\times V\rightarrow\omega$, where $\omega$ denotes the natural numbers and $(V,E)$ is usually abbreviated by the name of the graph $(V,E)$.


We recall that, by Section(reftodo), for any objects $G_0=(V_0,E_0)$ and $G_1=(V_1,E_1)$ of SimpGph, 

* there is the hom-set SimpGph$(G_0,G_1)$ $=$ $\{$ all set-maps $V_0\overset{f_0}{\rightarrow}V_1$ with $u_{0,0}$ $E$ $u_{0,1}$ $\vdash$ $f(u_{0,0})E f(u_{0,1})$ $\}$, 
* this hom-set is never empty, except if $G_1$ is the empty graph $(\emptyset,\emptyset)$; therefore, _every_ object of SimpGph except its initial object is [[weakly terminal]]

We now define three wide subcategories of SimpGph: 

SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings, 

SimpGph.StrongEmbedding, 

SimpGph.IsometricEmbedding.

It suffices to specify hom-sets of each, _because_ closedness under composition of the three subclasses of $\mathrm{Mor}(SimpGph)$ is be evident from the the respective definitions. 

SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings($G_0,G_1$) $:=$  $\{$ $f$ $\in$ SimpGph$(G_0,G_1)$: $f$ is  injective, as a set-map $\}$

SimpGph.StrongEmbeddings($G_0,G_1$) $:=$  $\{$ $f$ $\in$ SimpGph$(G_0,G_1)$: $f$ is a graph-isomorphism onto its image $\}$

SimpGph.IsometricEmbeddings($G_0,G_1$) $:=$ $\{$ $f$ $\in$ SimpGph$(G_0,G_1)$: $f$ is a graph-isomorphism onto its image, and $\mathsf{T}\vdash_{x,y:V_0}$ $\mathrm{dist}_{f_\ast(G_0)}(f(x),f(y))=\mathrm{dist}_{G_1}(f(x),f(y))$\}$ 


Evident remarks: 


* Each of SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings, SimpGph.StrongEmbedding, SimpGph.IsometricEmbedding are [[concrete categories]], because SimpGph is one.


*  There are class inclusions

Mor(SimpGph.IsometricEmbeddings) 

$\subseteq$ 

Mor(SimpGph.StrongEmbeddings) 

$\subseteq$

Mor(SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings) $=$ Monos(SimpGph).


* Because of the latter equality, each of SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings, SimpGph.StrongEmbedding, SimpGph.IsometricEmbedding is a [[left cancellative category]]

* None on SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings, SimpGph.StrongEmbedding, SimpGph.IsometricEmbedding is a [[groupoid]], nor a [[preorder]].


* The relation $(\emptyset,\emptyset)$ is the (only) initial object of each of SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings, SimpGph.StrongEmbedding, SimpGph.IsometricEmbedding. (Note that the relation $(\emptyset,\emptyset)$ is symmetric and reflexive.) 

* None of SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings, SimpGph.StrongEmbedding, SimpGph.IsometricEmbedding has any [[terminal object]].

#### Using the concept of categories-having-images

For further reference, we now recall a few basic concepts. 

A category $\mathsf{C}$ _having images_ means 

* for every object $O$ of $\mathsf{C}$ the canonical inclusion of the lattice $\mathrm{S}(O)$ of subojects of $O$ into the slice category $\mathsf{C}/O$ has a left adjoint. 

If so, the left-adjoint is denoted by $\mathrm{im}$.

If $\mathsf{C}$ has images, and if, moreover, $\mathsf{C}$ has all pullbacks, then 

* for every morphism $O_0\overset{f}{\longrightarrow}O_1$ of $\mathsf{C}$ the pullback $\mathrm{S}(O_1)\overset{f^\ast}{\rightarrow}\mathrm{S}(O_0)$ has a left adjoint. 

This left adjoint is often denoted by $\exists_f\leftvdash f^\ast$.

We will now analyse systematically whether SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings, SimpGph.StrongEmbedding, 
SimpGph.IsometricEmbedding,

(images) have images, 
(pullbacks) have pullbacks.



As to (images), we argue from the general to the specific. We notice that 

* each of the categories in question is a [[concrete category]], more specifically, a [[construct]],

and ask

* under which hypotheses does a concrete category have  images,

and, moreover, 

* under which hypotheses does a concrete category have images _and_ these images are the images of the set-maps obtained by the forgetful functor,

and then will specialize to SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings, SimpGph.StrongEmbedding, 
SimpGph.IsometricEmbedding. 


Let $\mathsf{C}$ be any concrete category, let $U\colon\mathsf{C}\rightarrow\mathsf{Set}$ be any faithful functor.

(under construction)



#### A remark on epi-mono-factorizations


(under construction)


The following is an epi-mono-factorization $f=m\circ e$ of the non-isometric strong embedding $f$ from (reftodo).


<svg
   xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/"
   xmlns:cc="http://creativecommons.org/ns#"
   xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
   xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"
   xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"
   viewBox="0 0 72.445081 244.98933"
   height="244.98933"
   width="72.445084"
   xml:space="preserve"
   version="1.1"
   id="svg5224"><metadata
     id="metadata5230"><rdf:RDF><cc:Work
         rdf:about=""><dc:format>image/svg+xml</dc:format><dc:type
           rdf:resource="http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/StillImage" /><dc:title></dc:title></cc:Work></rdf:RDF></metadata><defs
     id="defs5228"><clipPath
       id="clipPath5242"
       clipPathUnits="userSpaceOnUse"><path
         id="path5244"
         d="m 0,0 5669.291,0 0,5669.291 L 0,5669.291 0,0 Z" /></clipPath><clipPath
       id="clipPath5564"
       clipPathUnits="userSpaceOnUse"><path
         id="path5566"
         d="m 0,0 178.141,0 0,310.746 L 0,310.746 0,0 Z" /></clipPath><clipPath
       id="clipPath6062"
       clipPathUnits="userSpaceOnUse"><path
         id="path6064"
         d="m 0,0 178.141,0 0,480.824 L 0,480.824 0,0 Z" /></clipPath><clipPath
       id="clipPath6118"
       clipPathUnits="userSpaceOnUse"><path
         id="path6120"
         d="m 0,0 178.141,0 0,480.824 L 0,480.824 0,0 Z" /></clipPath></defs><g
     transform="matrix(1.25,0,0,-1.25,-28.311954,725.70069)"
     id="g5232"><g
       transform="matrix(0.10796,0,0,0.10796,0,-0.88987591)"
       id="g5234"><g
         id="g5236"><g
           id="g5238"><g
             transform="translate(-2.7475482,2.0606611)"
             clip-path="url(#clipPath5242)"
             id="g5240"><text
               id="text5246"
               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,5523.588,5654.893)"><tspan
                 id="tspan5248"
                 y="0"
                 x="0">5</tspan></text>
<g
               transform="translate(228.585,5570.437)"
               id="g5250"><g
                 transform="translate(54.688,-425.128)"
                 id="g5614"><g
                   transform="matrix(4.3353233,0,0,4.3353233,235.90597,-795.22544)"
                   id="g5616"><g
                     id="g5618" /><g
                     id="g5620"><g
                       id="g5622"><path
                         id="path5624"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -27.35468,0 c 0,0.54793 -0.44418,0.99213 -0.99212,0.99213 -0.54794,0 -0.99213,-0.4442 -0.99213,-0.99213 0,-0.54793 0.44419,-0.99213 0.99213,-0.99213 0.54794,0 0.99212,0.4442 0.99212,0.99213 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(-28.346,0)"
                         id="g5626"><g
                           id="g5628" /><g
                           transform="translate(28.346,0)"
                           id="g5630" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5632"><g
                         transform="translate(-42.007,-8.652)"
                         id="g5634"><g
                           id="g5636"><g
                             transform="translate(-241.266,-5136.657)"
                             id="g5638"><text
                               id="text5640"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,241.266,5136.657)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5642"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">v</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5644"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,246.095,5135.163)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5646"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">0</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(241.266,5136.657)"
                               id="g5648" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(42.007,8.652)"
                           id="g5650" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5652"><path
                         id="path5654"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -55.70149,28.3468 c 0,0.54794 -0.44419,0.99213 -0.99213,0.99213 -0.54793,0 -0.99213,-0.44419 -0.99213,-0.99213 0,-0.54794 0.4442,-0.99212 0.99213,-0.99212 0.54794,0 0.99213,0.44418 0.99213,0.99212 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(-56.692,28.347)"
                         id="g5656"><g
                           id="g5658" /><g
                           transform="translate(56.692,-28.347)"
                           id="g5660" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5662"><g
                         transform="translate(-70.702,26.949)"
                         id="g5664"><g
                           id="g5666"><g
                             transform="translate(-212.571,-5172.258)"
                             id="g5668"><text
                               id="text5670"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,212.571,5172.258)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5672"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">v</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5674"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,217.4,5170.764)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5676"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">1</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(212.571,5172.258)"
                               id="g5678" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(70.702,-26.949)"
                           id="g5680" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5682"><path
                         id="path5684"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -13.18126,56.69362 c 0,0.54793 -0.44418,0.99213 -0.99213,0.99213 -0.54794,0 -0.99212,-0.4442 -0.99212,-0.99213 0,-0.54794 0.44418,-0.99213 0.99212,-0.99213 0.54795,0 0.99213,0.44419 0.99213,0.99213 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(-14.173,56.693)"
                         id="g5686"><g
                           id="g5688" /><g
                           transform="translate(14.173,-56.693)"
                           id="g5690" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5692"><g
                         transform="translate(-18.822,62.898)"
                         id="g5694"><g
                           id="g5696"><g
                             transform="translate(-264.451,-5208.207)"
                             id="g5698"><text
                               id="text5700"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,264.451,5208.207)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5702"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">v</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5704"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,269.28,5206.713)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5706"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">2</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(264.451,5208.207)"
                               id="g5708" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(18.822,-62.898)"
                           id="g5710" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5712"><path
                         id="path5714"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m 29.33893,28.3468 c 0,0.54794 -0.44419,0.99213 -0.99213,0.99213 -0.54794,0 -0.99212,-0.44419 -0.99212,-0.99213 0,-0.54794 0.44418,-0.99212 0.99212,-0.99212 0.54794,0 0.99213,0.44418 0.99213,0.99212 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(28.347,28.346)"
                         id="g5716"><g
                           id="g5718" /><g
                           transform="translate(-28.347,-28.346)"
                           id="g5720" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5722"><g
                         transform="translate(33.058,26.949)"
                         id="g5724"><g
                           id="g5726"><g
                             transform="translate(-316.331,-5172.258)"
                             id="g5728"><text
                               id="text5730"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,316.331,5172.258)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5732"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">v</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5734"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,321.16,5170.764)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5736"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">3</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(316.331,5172.258)"
                               id="g5738" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(-33.058,-26.949)"
                           id="g5740" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5742"><path
                         id="path5744"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m 0.99213,170.08086 c 0,0.54792 -0.4442,0.99212 -0.99213,0.99212 -0.54793,0 -0.99213,-0.4442 -0.99213,-0.99212 0,-0.54795 0.4442,-0.99213 0.99213,-0.99213 0.54793,0 0.99213,0.44418 0.99213,0.99213 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(0,170.079)"
                         id="g5746"><g
                           id="g5748" /><g
                           transform="translate(0,-170.079)"
                           id="g5750" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5752"><g
                         transform="translate(4.363,161.427)"
                         id="g5754"><g
                           id="g5756"><g
                             transform="translate(-287.636,-5306.736)"
                             id="g5758"><text
                               id="text5760"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,287.636,5306.736)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5762"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">v</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5764"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,292.465,5305.242)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5766"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">4</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(287.636,5306.736)"
                               id="g5768" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(-4.363,-161.427)"
                           id="g5770" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5772"><path
                         id="path5774"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -27.35468,170.08086 c 0,0.54792 -0.44418,0.99212 -0.99212,0.99212 -0.54794,0 -0.99213,-0.4442 -0.99213,-0.99212 0,-0.54795 0.44419,-0.99213 0.99213,-0.99213 0.54794,0 0.99212,0.44418 0.99212,0.99213 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(-28.346,170.079)"
                         id="g5776"><g
                           id="g5778" /><g
                           transform="translate(28.346,-170.079)"
                           id="g5780" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5782"><g
                         transform="translate(-42.007,161.427)"
                         id="g5784"><g
                           id="g5786"><g
                             transform="translate(-241.266,-5306.736)"
                             id="g5788"><text
                               id="text5790"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,241.266,5306.736)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5792"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">v</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5794"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,246.095,5305.242)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5796"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">0</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(241.266,5306.736)"
                               id="g5798" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(42.007,-161.427)"
                           id="g5800" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5802"><path
                         id="path5804"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -55.70149,198.42766 c 0,0.54794 -0.44419,0.99212 -0.99213,0.99212 -0.54793,0 -0.99213,-0.44418 -0.99213,-0.99212 0,-0.54795 0.4442,-0.99213 0.99213,-0.99213 0.54794,0 0.99213,0.44418 0.99213,0.99213 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(-56.692,198.425)"
                         id="g5806"><g
                           id="g5808" /><g
                           transform="translate(56.692,-198.425)"
                           id="g5810" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5812"><g
                         transform="translate(-70.702,197.027)"
                         id="g5814"><g
                           id="g5816"><g
                             transform="translate(-212.571,-5342.336)"
                             id="g5818"><text
                               id="text5820"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,212.571,5342.336)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5822"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">v</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5824"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,217.4,5340.842)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5826"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">1</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(212.571,5342.336)"
                               id="g5828" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(70.702,-197.027)"
                           id="g5830" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5832"><path
                         id="path5834"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -13.18126,226.77448 c 0,0.54794 -0.44418,0.99212 -0.99213,0.99212 -0.54794,0 -0.99212,-0.44418 -0.99212,-0.99212 0,-0.54795 0.44418,-0.99213 0.99212,-0.99213 0.54795,0 0.99213,0.44418 0.99213,0.99213 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(-14.173,226.772)"
                         id="g5836"><g
                           id="g5838" /><g
                           transform="translate(14.173,-226.772)"
                           id="g5840" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5842"><g
                         transform="translate(-18.822,232.977)"
                         id="g5844"><g
                           id="g5846"><g
                             transform="translate(-264.451,-5378.286)"
                             id="g5848"><text
                               id="text5850"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,264.451,5378.286)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5852"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">v</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5854"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,269.28,5376.792)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5856"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">2</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(264.451,5378.286)"
                               id="g5858" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(18.822,-232.977)"
                           id="g5860" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5862"><path
                         id="path5864"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m 29.33893,198.42766 c 0,0.54794 -0.44419,0.99212 -0.99213,0.99212 -0.54794,0 -0.99212,-0.44418 -0.99212,-0.99212 0,-0.54795 0.44418,-0.99213 0.99212,-0.99213 0.54794,0 0.99213,0.44418 0.99213,0.99213 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(28.347,198.425)"
                         id="g5866"><g
                           id="g5868" /><g
                           transform="translate(-28.347,-198.425)"
                           id="g5870" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5872"><g
                         transform="translate(33.058,197.027)"
                         id="g5874"><g
                           id="g5876"><g
                             transform="translate(-316.331,-5342.336)"
                             id="g5878"><text
                               id="text5880"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,316.331,5342.336)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5882"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">v</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5884"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,321.16,5340.842)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5886"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">3</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(316.331,5342.336)"
                               id="g5888" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(-33.058,-197.027)"
                           id="g5890" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5892"><path
                         id="path5894"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -27.35468,-170.08086 c 0,0.54795 -0.44418,0.99213 -0.99212,0.99213 -0.54794,0 -0.99213,-0.44418 -0.99213,-0.99213 0,-0.54792 0.44419,-0.99212 0.99213,-0.99212 0.54794,0 0.99212,0.4442 0.99212,0.99212 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(-28.346,-170.079)"
                         id="g5896"><g
                           id="g5898" /><g
                           transform="translate(28.346,170.079)"
                           id="g5900" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5902"><g
                         transform="translate(-42.881,-178.73)"
                         id="g5904"><g
                           id="g5906"><g
                             transform="translate(-240.392,-4966.579)"
                             id="g5908"><text
                               id="text5910"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,240.392,4966.579)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5912"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">u</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5914"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,246.095,4965.085)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5916"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">0</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(240.392,4966.579)"
                               id="g5918" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(42.881,178.73)"
                           id="g5920" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5922"><path
                         id="path5924"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -55.70149,-141.73404 c 0,0.54794 -0.44419,0.99213 -0.99213,0.99213 -0.54793,0 -0.99213,-0.44419 -0.99213,-0.99213 0,-0.54794 0.4442,-0.99213 0.99213,-0.99213 0.54794,0 0.99213,0.44419 0.99213,0.99213 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(-56.692,-141.732)"
                         id="g5926"><g
                           id="g5928" /><g
                           transform="translate(56.692,141.732)"
                           id="g5930" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5932"><g
                         transform="translate(-71.576,-143.13)"
                         id="g5934"><g
                           id="g5936"><g
                             transform="translate(-211.697,-5002.179)"
                             id="g5938"><text
                               id="text5940"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,211.697,5002.179)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5942"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">u</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5944"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,217.4,5000.685)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5946"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">1</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(211.697,5002.179)"
                               id="g5948" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(71.576,143.13)"
                           id="g5950" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5952"><path
                         id="path5954"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -13.18126,-113.38724 c 0,0.54794 -0.44418,0.99213 -0.99213,0.99213 -0.54794,0 -0.99212,-0.44419 -0.99212,-0.99213 0,-0.54793 0.44418,-0.99212 0.99212,-0.99212 0.54795,0 0.99213,0.44419 0.99213,0.99212 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(-14.173,-113.386)"
                         id="g5956"><g
                           id="g5958" /><g
                           transform="translate(14.173,113.386)"
                           id="g5960" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5962"><g
                         transform="translate(-19.259,-107.181)"
                         id="g5964"><g
                           id="g5966"><g
                             transform="translate(-264.014,-5038.128)"
                             id="g5968"><text
                               id="text5970"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,264.014,5038.128)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5972"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">u</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text5974"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,269.717,5036.634)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan5976"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">2</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(264.014,5038.128)"
                               id="g5978" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(19.259,107.181)"
                           id="g5980" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5982"><path
                         id="path5984"
                         style="fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.3985;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m 29.33893,-141.73404 c 0,0.54794 -0.44419,0.99213 -0.99213,0.99213 -0.54794,0 -0.99212,-0.44419 -0.99212,-0.99213 0,-0.54794 0.44418,-0.99213 0.99212,-0.99213 0.54794,0 0.99213,0.44419 0.99213,0.99213 z" /><g
                         transform="translate(28.347,-141.732)"
                         id="g5986"><g
                           id="g5988" /><g
                           transform="translate(-28.347,141.732)"
                           id="g5990" /></g></g><g
                       id="g5992"><g
                         transform="translate(33.058,-143.13)"
                         id="g5994"><g
                           id="g5996"><g
                             transform="translate(-316.331,-5002.179)"
                             id="g5998"><text
                               id="text6000"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,316.331,5002.179)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan6002"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">u</tspan></text>
<text
                               id="text6004"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:6.97380018px;font-family:CMR7;-inkscape-font-specification:CMR7;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:1;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,322.034,5000.685)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan6006"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">3</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(316.331,5002.179)"
                               id="g6008" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(-33.058,143.13)"
                           id="g6010" /></g></g><g
                       id="g6012"><path
                         id="path6014"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="M -29.18924,0.84242 -55.85117,27.50436" /></g><g
                       id="g6016"><path
                         id="path6018"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -55.69928,29.00967 40.53156,27.02106" /></g><g
                       id="g6020"><path
                         id="path6022"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="M -13.17906,56.03075 27.35248,29.00969" /></g><g
                       id="g6024"><path
                         id="path6026"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -29.18924,170.92328 -26.66193,26.66196" /></g><g
                       id="g6028"><path
                         id="path6030"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -55.69928,199.09053 40.53156,27.02106" /></g><g
                       id="g6032"><path
                         id="path6034"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="M -13.17906,226.1116 27.35248,199.09055" /></g><g
                       id="g6036"><path
                         id="path6038"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="M 27.50436,197.58524 0.84244,170.92328" /></g><g
                       id="g6040"><path
                         id="path6042"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -1.19138,170.08086 -25.96405,0" /></g><g
                       id="g6044"><path
                         id="path6046"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -29.18924,-169.23842 -26.66193,26.66194" /></g><g
                       id="g6048"><path
                         id="path6050"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -55.69928,-141.07117 40.53156,27.02106" /></g><g
                       id="g6052"><path
                         id="path6054"
                         style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:0.99628001;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                         d="m -13.17906,-114.0501 40.53154,-27.02107" /></g><g
                       id="g6056"><g
                         transform="translate(-103.243,-211.891)"
                         id="g6058"><g
                           id="g6060" /><g
                           id="g6066"><g
                             style="opacity:0.75"
                             id="g6068"
                             clip-path="url(#clipPath6062)"><g
                               id="g6070"
                               transform="translate(103.244,211.891)"><g
                                 id="g6072"><path
                                   id="path6074"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="m -28.3468,-168.88947 0,165.70554" /><g
                                   id="g6076"
                                   transform="matrix(0,1,-1,0,-28.3468,-2.18765)"><g
                                   id="g6078"><path
                                   id="path6080"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:round;stroke-linejoin:round;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="M -3.9851,5.27061 C -3.25705,2.1082 -1.63463,0.6149 0,0 -1.63463,-0.6149 -3.25705,-2.1082 -3.9851,-5.27061" /></g></g></g><g
                                 id="g6082"><path
                                   id="path6084"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="m -56.69362,-140.54266 0,165.70553" /><g
                                   id="g6086"
                                   transform="matrix(0,1,-1,0,-56.69362,26.15915)"><g
                                   id="g6088"><path
                                   id="path6090"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:round;stroke-linejoin:round;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="M -3.9851,5.27061 C -3.25705,2.1082 -1.63463,0.6149 0,0 -1.63463,-0.6149 -3.25705,-2.1082 -3.9851,-5.27061" /></g></g></g><g
                                 id="g6092"><path
                                   id="path6094"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="m -14.17339,-112.19585 0,165.70552" /><g
                                   id="g6096"
                                   transform="matrix(0,1,-1,0,-14.17339,54.50595)"><g
                                   id="g6098"><path
                                   id="path6100"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:round;stroke-linejoin:round;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="M -3.9851,5.27061 C -3.25705,2.1082 -1.63463,0.6149 0,0 -1.63463,-0.6149 -3.25705,-2.1082 -3.9851,-5.27061" /></g></g></g><g
                                 id="g6102"><path
                                   id="path6104"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="m 28.3468,-140.54266 0,165.70553" /><g
                                   id="g6106"
                                   transform="matrix(0,1,-1,0,28.3468,26.15915)"><g
                                   id="g6108"><path
                                   id="path6110"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:round;stroke-linejoin:round;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="M -3.9851,5.27061 C -3.25705,2.1082 -1.63463,0.6149 0,0 -1.63463,-0.6149 -3.25705,-2.1082 -3.9851,-5.27061" /></g></g></g></g></g></g></g></g><g
                       id="g6112"><g
                         transform="translate(-103.243,-211.891)"
                         id="g6114"><g
                           id="g6116" /><g
                           id="g6122"><g
                             style="opacity:0.75"
                             id="g6124"
                             clip-path="url(#clipPath6118)"><g
                               id="g6126"
                               transform="translate(103.244,211.891)"><g
                                 id="g6128"><path
                                   id="path6130"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="m -28.3468,1.19138 0,165.70553" /><g
                                   id="g6132"
                                   transform="matrix(0,1,-1,0,-28.3468,167.89319)"><g
                                   id="g6134"><path
                                   id="path6136"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:round;stroke-linejoin:round;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="M -3.9851,5.27061 C -3.25705,2.1082 -1.63463,0.6149 0,0 -1.63463,-0.6149 -3.25705,-2.1082 -3.9851,-5.27061" /></g></g></g><g
                                 id="g6138"><path
                                   id="path6140"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="m -56.69362,29.53818 0,165.70555" /><g
                                   id="g6142"
                                   transform="matrix(0,1,-1,0,-56.69362,196.24)"><g
                                   id="g6144"><path
                                   id="path6146"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:round;stroke-linejoin:round;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="M -3.9851,5.27061 C -3.25705,2.1082 -1.63463,0.6149 0,0 -1.63463,-0.6149 -3.25705,-2.1082 -3.9851,-5.27061" /></g></g></g><g
                                 id="g6148"><path
                                   id="path6150"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="m -14.17339,57.885 0,165.70555" /><g
                                   id="g6152"
                                   transform="matrix(0,1,-1,0,-14.17339,224.58682)"><g
                                   id="g6154"><path
                                   id="path6156"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:round;stroke-linejoin:round;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="M -3.9851,5.27061 C -3.25705,2.1082 -1.63463,0.6149 0,0 -1.63463,-0.6149 -3.25705,-2.1082 -3.9851,-5.27061" /></g></g></g><g
                                 id="g6158"><path
                                   id="path6160"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:butt;stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="m 28.3468,29.53818 0,165.70555" /><g
                                   id="g6162"
                                   transform="matrix(0,1,-1,0,28.3468,196.24)"><g
                                   id="g6164"><path
                                   id="path6166"
                                   style="fill:none;stroke:#000000;stroke-width:1.99255002;stroke-linecap:round;stroke-linejoin:round;stroke-miterlimit:10;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1"
                                   d="M -3.9851,5.27061 C -3.25705,2.1082 -1.63463,0.6149 0,0 -1.63463,-0.6149 -3.25705,-2.1082 -3.9851,-5.27061" /></g></g></g></g></g></g></g></g><g
                       id="g6168"><g
                         id="g6170" /><g
                         transform="matrix(20,0,0,20,-60.561,-88.25)"
                         id="g6172"><g
                           id="g6174"><g
                             transform="translate(-222.712,-5057.059)"
                             id="g6176"><text
                               id="text6178"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:0.2;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,222.712,5057.059)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan6180"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">e</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(222.712,5057.059)"
                               id="g6182" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(60.561,88.25)"
                           id="g6184" /></g></g><g
                       id="g6186"><g
                         id="g6188" /><g
                         transform="matrix(15,0,0,15,-79.778,92.552)"
                         id="g6190"><g
                           id="g6192"><g
                             transform="translate(-203.495,-5237.861)"
                             id="g6194"><text
                               id="text6196"
                               style="font-variant:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:9.96259975px;font-family:CMMI10;-inkscape-font-specification:CMMI10;writing-mode:lr-tb;fill:#000000;fill-opacity:0.2;fill-rule:nonzero;stroke:none"
                               transform="matrix(1,0,0,-1,203.495,5237.861)"><tspan
                                 id="tspan6198"
                                 y="0"
                                 x="0">m</tspan></text>
<g
                               transform="translate(203.495,5237.861)"
                               id="g6200" /></g></g><g
                           transform="translate(79.778,-92.552)"
                           id="g6202" /></g></g></g></g></g></g></g></g></g></g></g></svg>


#### Characterizing the classes of morphisms of the three wide subcategories

##### Mor(SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings) 

Like already mentioned, the weak isomorphisms are precisely the monos in SimpGph. 
Therefore, Mono(SimpGph) is an [[elementary class]], even a [[finitely axiomatizable]] class, and even axiomatizable by [[Horn]] sequents, w.r.t. the usual first-order logic over the usual signature $f_i,\circ$ of the language of 1-category theory. Let us take the time to spell this out: 


Mor(SimpGph.WeakEmbeddings) 

$=$ 

Mono(SimpGph)

$=$ 

$\{ f_0: f_0\circ f_1 = f_0\circ f_2 \vdash_{f_0,f_1,f_2 : Mor(SimpGph)} f_1 = f_2    \}$

##### Mor(SimpGph.StrongEmbeddings) 

(under construction)

##### Mor(SimpGph.IsometricEmbeddings) 

The definition of the class of morphisms makes use of the distance-function, hence is not a definition in the language of category theory. Needless to say, this does not mean that it could not perhaps axiomatized nevertheless in that language. We will now prove that it cannot.

(under construction)



#### Using the concept of [[regular morphism]]

(under construction)


## References 

* Reinhard Diestel, Graph Theory (Second Edition), Graduate Texts in Mathematics 173, Springer (2000). 
{#Diestel}

* [[Jiri Adamek]] and H. Herrlich, _Cartesian closed categories, quasitopoi, and topological universes_. Comm. Math. Univ. Carol., Vol. 27, No. 2 (1986), 235-257. ([web](http://dml.cz/handle/10338.dmlcz/106447))
{#AdamHerr} 


category: category

[[!redirects category of simple graphs]]
[[!redirects Simp Gph]]
[[!redirects SimpGph]]

[[!redirects simple graph]]
[[!redirects simple graphs]]
