
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Deduction and Induction
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include deduction and induction - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A **syllogism** is a pattern of [[deduction|deductive]] argument of a certain limited range of form. The study of syllogisms was originated by [[Aristotle]] and later developed by his followers as well as by the Stoics. Syllogisms were central objects of study for medieval logicians.

Syllogisms involve two premises and a conclusion, each expressing a statement of the form that either all, none or some members of a class do or do not have a certain [[property]]. For example,

* No fish is a mammal.
* Some sea creatures are fish.
* Therefore, some sea creatures are not mammals.

In the nineteenth century, syllogism became seen to be insufficiently expressive as more complicated relations and [[quantification]] were encountered. [[Predicate logic]] came to take its place.

## Related entries

* [[natural deduction]]

* [[co-Heyting negation]]

## References

* {#SEP} Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, _[Aristotle's logic](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-logic/)_

* [[Georg Hegel]], _[[Lectures on the History of Philosophy]] -- [Aristotle -- Logic](Lectures+on+the+History+of+Philosophy#AristotleLogic)_.

The relation between syllogistic term and modern predicate logic is discussed en detail in chapter II of the first textbook on [[mathematical logic]]:

* [[David Hilbert|D. Hilbert]], W. Ackermann, _Grundzüge der Theoretischen Logik_ , 4th ed. Springer Heidelberg 1959[1928].

After J. Lukasiewicz's classic monograph on Aristotelian logic from a modern point of view, the 1970s saw influential interpretations of it as systems of [[natural deduction]]:

* J. Bacon, _Natural-deduction rules for syllogistic_ , JSL **31** (1966) pp.686-7.

* J. Corcoran, _Completeness of an ancient logic_ , JSL **37** (1972) pp.696-702.

* T. Smiley, _What is a syllogism_ , JPL **2** (1973) pp.136-154.

An approach to Aristotelian logic using [[category theory]] is in

* M. La Palme Reyes, J. Macnamara, [[Gonzalo E. Reyes|G. E. Reyes]] , _Functoriality and Grammatical Role in Syllogisms_ , Notre Dame J. Formal Logic **35** no.1 (1994) pp.41-66. ([pdf](http://projecteuclid.org/download/pdf_1/euclid.ndjfl/1040609293))

* {#RRZ94} M. La Palme Reyes, J. Macnamara, [[Gonzalo E. Reyes|G. E. Reyes]], H. Zolfaghari, _The non-Boolean logic of natural language negation_ , Phil. Math. **2** no.1 (1994) pp.45-68.

A proposal for formalization of syllogisms within [[linear logic]] is in 

* {#Pagnan13} Ruggero Pagnan, _Syllogisms in Rudimentary Linear Logic, Diagrammatically_ . ([arXiv:1302.7111](http://arxiv.org/abs/1302.7111))


[[!redirects syllogisms]]