
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Polymorphism
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

In [[computer science]], *polymorphism* is the definition of more than one [[function]] with the same name.  One usually distinguishes two types of polymorphism: *ad hoc polymorphism* and *parametric polymorphism*.


## Ad hoc polymorphism

In **ad hoc polymorphism**, one simply defines multiple functions with the same name and different [[types]], relying on the compiler (or, in some cases, the run-time system) to determine the correct function to call based on the types of its arguments and return value.  This is also called **overloading**.  For instance, using a mathematical notation, one might define functions

$$ add : \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$$
$$ add : \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}$$

and then when $add(3,2)$ is invoked, the compiler knows to call the first function since $3$ and $2$ are [[natural numbers]], whereas when $add(4.2,\pi)$ is invoked it calls the second function since $4.2$ and $\pi$ are [[real numbers]].

Note that there is nothing which stipulates that the *behavior* of a class of ad-hocly polymorphic functions with the same name should be at all similar.  Nothing prevents us from defining $ add : \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$ to add its arguments but $ add : \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}$ to subtract its arguments.  Of course, it is good programming practice to make overloaded functions similar in their behavior.

In the example above, there might even be a [[coercion]] function $c : \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{R}$, to be invoked whenever a natural number appears where the compiler expects a real number, giving a [[commutative diagram]]
$$ \array {
   \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N}     & \overset{add}\to  & \mathbb{N} \\
   \mathllap{c \times c} \downarrow &                   & \downarrow \mathrlap{c} \\
   \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R}     & \underset{add}\to & \mathbb{R}
} $$
But thing don\'t always work out this way.


## Parametric polymorphism

In **parametric polymorphism**, one writes code to define a function *once*, which contains a "type variable" that can be instantiated at many different types to produce different functions.  For instance, we can define a function

$$ first : A\times A \to A $$

where $A$ is a type variable (or *parameter*), by

$$ first(x,y) \coloneqq x. $$

Now the compiler automatically instantiates a copy of this function, with identical code, for any type at which it is called.  Thus we can behave as if we had functions

$$ first : \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$$
$$ first : \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}$$

and so on, for any types we wish.  In contrast to *ad hoc* polymorphism, in this case we do have a guarantee that all these same-named functions are doing "the same thing", because they are all instantiated by the same original polymorphic code.

In a [[dependent type theory|dependently typed programming language]] with a [[type of types]], such as [[Coq]] or [[Agda]], a parametrically polymorphic family of functions can simply be considered to be a single dependently typed function whose first argument is a type.  Thus our function above would be typed as

$$ first : \prod_{A:Type} A\times A \to A$$

However, parametric polymorphism makes sense and is very useful even in languages with less rich type systems, such as [[Haskell]] and [[ML]].

## Related concepts

* [[logical relations]]

## References

* [[Robert Atkey]], [[Neil Ghani]] and Patricia Johann, _A Relationally Parametric Model of Dependent Type Theory_, In Proceedings of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL 2014). 2014. ([web](http://bentnib.org/dtt-parametricity.html))

[[!redirects polymorphism]]
[[!redirects ad hoc polymorphism]]
[[!redirects parametric polymorphism]]

[[!redirects parametricity]]