
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Topology
+--{: .hide}
[[!include topology - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


# Contents 
* table of contents 
{: toc}

## Idea 

Traditionally, a compactification of a [[topological space]] $X$ is a [[compact space]] $C$ together with an [[embedding]] $i \colon X \to C$ as a [[dense subspace]]. Well known is for instance the _[[one-point compactification]]_ which for instance sends the real [[line]] to the [[circle]].

In some cases, the terminology 'compactification' is applied to certain cases where $i$ is not an embedding (does not map [[homeomorphism|homeomorphically]] to its image equipped with the subspace topology), particularly in the case of [[Stone-Čech compactification]] of general topological spaces. 

If the space has further geometric structure, the compactification is 
usually required to has such a structure and embedding has to preserve it.
Many [[moduli space]]s in algebraic and differential geometry have their
natural compactifications. They are often useful because they carry natural integration which is useful in defining various invariants. Examples of compactifications in geometry: [[wonderful compactification]] and [[Deligne-Mumford compactification]].

A useful intuition throughout is that a 'compactification' is a process of adding "ideal points at infinity" in some way to "complete" a space. (Compact [[separation axioms|regular]] spaces $X$ themselves being "complete" in a technical sense: there is a unique [[uniform space|uniform structure]] whose uniform topology is the topology on $X$, and $X$ is complete with respect to this uniformity.) 

## Compactification "in some dimensions"

Often s space can be viewed as a total space of a bundle over some base.
We may want to embed the space into a bigger bundle, such that the induced
embedding of each fiber into the new fiber is a compactification.

This is roughly the case in most __compactifications in physics__. In most cases the space is equipped with a metric and additional quantities for defining physics, like Lagrangean density, which possibly depend on metric.
Then one requires that the compactified fiber is finite but small compared to some reference scale (or even viewed in a limit when the Riemannian volume tends to zero), see [[Kaluza-Klein mechanism]]. Sometimes one does not even consider a noncompact case to start with but by compactification in physics means only passing to the limit of small (Riemannian volume of) fibers. 

## Examples 

* [[One-point compactification]]

* [[Stone–Cech compactification]]

* [[end compactification|End compactification]]

* [[Bohr compactification]]

... 


[[!redirects compactification]]
[[!redirects compactifications]]
