
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Let $X$ be a smooth [[complex manifold]] with trivial [[canonical bundle]], and let $A^{0,*}(T_X)$ be the [[differential graded Lie algebra]] of smooth [[differential form]]s of type $(0,*)$ with coefficients in the [[tangent sheaf]] of $X$. The Goldman-Millson quasi-abelianity theorem [GM90](#citegoldman-millson) states that the [[differential graded Lie algebra|dgla]] $A^{0,*}(T_X)$ is quasi-abelian, i.e., it is [[quasi-isomorphism|quasi-isomorphic]] to an [[abelian differential graded Lie algebra|abelian dgla]].

Since the dgla $A^{0,*}(T_X)$ is a [[model]] for the [[derived functor|derived]] [[global section]]s $R\Gamma\mathcal{T}_X$ of the tangent sheaf $\mathcal{T}_X$ of $X$, the Goldman-Millson quasi-abelianity theorem can be stated by saying that if $X$ be a smooth complex manifold with trivial canonical bundle, then $R\Gamma\mathcal{T}_X$ is quasi-abelian. In this form the Goldman-Millson theorem can be generalized to smooth [[projective manifold]]s over an arbitrary [[characteristic]] zero [[algebraically closed
field]] $\mathbb{K}$, as done by Iacono and Manetti in [IM10](#citeiacono-manetti).

A description of the Goldman-Millson quasi-abelianity theorem within the framework of [[higher category theory]] is given in [FM10](#citefiorenza-martinengo).

## References ##

* {: #citegoldman-millson }
W. M. Goldman, J. J. Millson. _The [[nLab:homotopy]] invariance of the Kuranishi space._ Illinois J.
Math. 34 (1990) 337-367.

* {: #citeiacono-manetti }
D. Iacono, M. Manetti._An algebraic proof of Bogomolov-Tian-Todorov theorem_ Deformation Spaces. Vol. 39 (2010), p. 113-133; [arXiv:0902.0732](http://arxiv.org/abs/0902.0732)

* {: #citefiorenza-martinengo }
D. Fiorenza, E. Martinengo. _A short note on ∞-groupoids and the period map for projective manifolds_ Publications of the nLab. Vol. 2 (2012); [arXiv:0911.3845](http://arxiv.org/abs/0911.3845)