
**[[diagram chasing]]** in [[homological algebra]]

* [[salamander lemma]] $\Rightarrow$

  * [[3x3 lemma]], [nxn lemma](salamander+lemma#nxnLemma)

  * [[four lemma]] $\Rightarrow$ [[five lemma]]

  * [[snake lemma]] $\Rightarrow$ [[connecting homomorphism]]

  * [[braid lemma]]









## Diagram-chase-like lemmas

+-- {: .standout}
**Caveat Lector.**
This section may duplicate/contradict other nLab accounts of similar lemmas. This section, its title, and its place in the present article, are tentative. Also, the title is somewhat of a misnomer since many of the lemmas intended to be collected (or linked) here are about categories which are _not_ abelian categories. The section is meant to be a place to collect lemmas asserting that the existence of one type of morphisms in one part of a commutative diagram implies that some other morphism in the diagram must have some type.


=--

### the snake lemma

[[snake lemma]]
### salamander lemma 

[[salamander lemma]]

### the five lemma

[[five lemma]]

### lemmas on pullbacks and pushouts

**Closedness of pullback squares under composition.**

* The composition of two pullback squares is a pullback square.

**Outer square being a pullback implies left-hand square being a pullback, in the presence of a jointly monic span.**

If 


$$\array{
O_{0,1} & \overset{f_{1,1}}{\to} & O_{1,1} & \overset{f_{2,1}}{\to} & O_{2,1} &  & &  & \\
\downarrow h_0 &&\downarrow h_1 &&\downarrow h_2 &&  &&  \\
O_{0,0} & \overset{f_{1,0}}{\to} & O_{1,0} & \overset{f_{2,0}}{\to} & O_{2,0}  & &  & 
}$$

is a commutative diagram in any category $\mathcal{C}$ such that 

*  the square consisting of $h_0$, $h_2$, $f_{2,1}\circ f_{1,1}$,  $f_{2,0}\circ f_{1,0}$ is a pullback in $\mathcal{C}$
* for all morphisms $g_1$ and $g_2$ with $cod(g_i)=O_{1,1}$: 
* * ( $f_{2,1}\circ g_1 = f_{2,1}\circ g_2$ and  $h_1\circ g_1 = h_1 \circ g_2$) implies ($g_1=g_2$) 

Then 

* the square consisting of $h_0$, $h_1$, $f_{1,0}$, $f_{1,1}$ is a pullback in $\mathcal{C}$

**A pushout implying a pullback via [[monomorphism]] (resp. [[strong monomorphism]]), in [[topos]] (resp. [[quasitopos]]).**

Suppose that $(\mathrm{T},\mathrm{C})$ is either

* (monomorphism,topos), or
* (strong monomorphism,quasitopos)

Suppose that 
$$\array{
O_{0,1} & \to & O_{1,1} \\
\downarrow m &&\downarrow h  \\
O_{0,0} & \to & O_{1,0}
}$$
is a commutative diagram in $\mathrm{C}$ such that 

* * $m$ is $\mathrm{T}$ in $\mathrm{C}$
* * the diagram is a pushout in $\mathrm{C}$


Then 

* * $h$ is $\mathrm{T}$ in $\mathrm{C}$
* * the diagram is a pullback in $\mathrm{C}$


(cf. [[quasitopos]], Section "Properties"). Note that the result for quasitoposes immediately implies the result for toposes, since all monomorphisms $i: A \to B$ in a topos are [[regular monomorphism|regular]] ($i$ being the equalizer of the arrows $\chi_i, t \circ !: B \to \Omega$ in 

$$\array{
 & & 1 \\ 
 & \mathllap{!} \nearrow & \downarrow \mathrlap{t} \\ 
B & \underset{\chi_i}{\to} & \Omega
}$$ 

where $\chi_i$ is the classifying map of $i$) and therefore strong. 


### lemmas on equalizers 

**An equalizer diagram implying an equalizer diagram, via monos and a pullback square.**

Suppose $\mathcal{C}$ is any category with equalizers. 
Suppose 

$$\array{
O_{0,1} & \to & O_{1,1} & \underoverset{\quad {}_0f_{1} \quad}{{}_1f_{1}}{\rightrightarrows} & O_{2,1} &  & &  & \\
\downarrow m_0 &&\downarrow m_1 &&\downarrow m_2 &&  &&  \\
O_{0,0} & \to & O_{1,0} & \underoverset{\quad {}_0f_{0} \quad}{ {}_1f_{0} }{\rightrightarrows} & O_{2,0}  & &  & 
}$$

is a diagram in $\mathcal{C}$ in which 

* * each of $m_0$,$m_1$, $m_2$ is monic
* * the squares on the right are serially commutative 
* * the lower row is an equalizer

Then 

* * the upper row is an equalizer iff the left square is a pullback. 
