
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Algebra
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

A [[ring]] $R$ is a **principal ideal domain** if

1. it is an [[integral domain]];

1. every [[ideal]] in $R$ is a [[principal ideal]]. 

Often _pid_ is used as an abbreviation of "principal ideal domain". 

## Examples

* any [[field]]

* the ring of [[integers]]

* a [[polynomial ring]] with [[coefficients]] in a field (in fact, for any commutative ring $R$, the ring $R[x]$ is a pid if and _only if_ $R$ is a field)

* a [[valuation ring|discrete valuation ring]] (for example, a ring of formal power series over a field) 

* the ring of entire [[holomorphic functions]] on $\mathbb{C}$ 

## Structure theory of modules 
 {#StructureTheoryOfModules}

### Free and projective modules 

+-- {: .num_theorem #free} 
###### Theorem 
If $R$ is a pid, then any [[submodule]] $M$ of a [[free module]] $F$ over $R$ is also free. (For the converse statement, see [here](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/free+module#submod).) 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
By freeness of $F$, there exists an isomorphism $F \cong \sum_{j \in J} R_j$, a [[coproduct]] of copies $R_j$ of $R$ (as a module over the ring $R$) indexed over a set $J$, which we assume [[well-ordering|well-ordered]] using the [[axiom of choice]]. Define submodules of $F$: 

$$F_{\leq j} \coloneqq \sum_{i \leq j} R_i, \qquad F_{\lt j} \coloneqq \sum_{i \lt j} R_i\,.$$ 

Any element of $M \cap F_{\leq j}$ can be written uniquely as $(x, r)$ where $x \in F_{\lt j}$ and $r \in R_j$. Define a [[homomorphism]]

$$p_j \colon M \cap F_{\leq j} \to R$$ 

by $p_j((x, r)) = r$. The [[kernel]] of $p_j$ is $M \cap F_{\lt j}$, and we have an [[exact sequence]]

$$0 \to M \cap F_{\lt j} \to M \cap F_{\leq j} \to \im p_j \to 0$$ 

where $\im p_j$ is a submodule (i.e., an [[ideal]]) of $R$, hence generated by a single element $r_j$. Let $K \subseteq J$ consist of those $j$ such that $r_j \neq 0$, and for $k \in K$, choose $m_k$ such that $p_k(m_k) = r_k$. We claim that $\{m_k: k \in K\}$ forms a [[basis]] for $M$. 

First we prove [[linear independence]] of $\{m_k\}$. Suppose $\sum_{i=1}^{n} a_i m_{k_i} = 0$, with $k_1 \lt k_2 \lt \ldots \lt k_n$. Applying $p_{k_n}$, we get $a_n p_{k_n}(m_{k_n}) = a_n r_{k_n} = 0$. Since $r_{k_n} \neq 0$, we have $a_n = 0$ (since we are working over a domain). The assertion now follows by [[induction]].  

Now we prove that the $m_k$ generate $M$. Assume otherwise, and let $j \in J$ be the least $j$ such that some $m \in M \cap F_{\leq j}$ cannot be written as a linear combination of the $m_k$, for $k \in K$. If $j \notin K$, then $m \in M \cap F_{\lt j}$, so that $m \in M \cap F_{\leq i}$ for some $i \lt j$, but this contradicts minimality of $j$. Therefore $j \in K$. Now, we have $p_j(m) = r \cdot r_j$ for some $r$; put $m' = m - r m_j$. Clearly 

$$p_j(m') = p_j(m) - r \cdot p_j(m_j) = 0$$ 

and so $m' \in M \cap F_{\lt j}$. Thus $m' \in M \cap F_{\leq i}$ for some $i \lt j$. At the same time, $m'$ cannot be written as a linear combination of the $m_k$; again, this contradicts minimality of $j$. Thus the $m_k$ generate $M$, as claimed. 
=-- 

Since the [[integers]] $\mathbb{Z}$ for a pid, and [[abelian groups]] are the same as $\mathbb{Z}$-[[modules]], we have 

+-- {: .num_cor} 
###### Corollary 
**(Dedekind)** 
A [[subgroup]] of a [[free abelian group]] is also free abelian. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_remark} 
###### Remark

The analog of this statement for possibly non-abelian [[groups]] is the _[[Nielsen-Schreier theorem]]_.

=--

Also, since [[projective modules]] are [[retracts]] of free modules, we have 

+-- {: .num_cor} 
###### Corollary 
Projective modules over a pid are free. In particular, submodules of projective modules are projective. 
=-- 

### Torsion-free modules 

+-- {: .num_prop #torsionfree}
###### Proposition 
A finitely generated [[torsion subgroup|torsionfree]] module $M$ over a pid $R$ is free. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
Let $S$ be a finite set of generators of $M$, and let $T \subseteq S$ be a maximal subset of linearly independent elements. (Unless $M = 0$, then $T$ has at least one element, because $M$ is torsionfree.) We claim that $M$ can be embedded as a submodule of the free module $F$ generated by $T$ (which in turn is the span of $T$ as a submodule $F \subseteq M$). By Theorem \ref{free}, it follows that $M$ is free. 

Let $x_1, \ldots, x_n$ be the elements of $T$. It follows from maximality of $T$ that for any $m \in S - T$, there is a linear relation 

$$r_m m + r_1 x_1 + \ldots + r_n x_n = 0$$ 

with $r_m \neq 0$. For each $m$ in the complement $S - T$, pick such an $r_m$, and form $r = \prod_{m \in S - T} r_m$. Then the image of the scalar multiplication $\lambda_r \colon M \to M$ factors through $F \subseteq M$, and $M \to \lambda_r(M)$ is monic because $M$ is torsionfree. This completes the proof. 
=-- 

+-- {: .num_prop #flat} 
###### Proposition 
Let $R$ be a pid. Then an $R$-module $M$ is torsionfree if and only if it is [[flat module|flat]]. 
=-- 

+-- {: .proof} 
###### Proof 
Suppose $M$ is flat. Let $K$ be the field of fractions of $R$; since $R$ is a domain, we have a monic $R$-module map $R \to K$. By flatness, we have an induced monomorphism $M \cong R \otimes_R M \to K \otimes_R M$. For any nonzero $r \in R$, the naturality square 

$$\array{
M & \to & K \otimes_R M \\
 \mathllap{\lambda_r} \downarrow & & \downarrow \mathrlap{1 \otimes \lambda_r} \\ 
M & \to & K \otimes_R M
}$$ 

commutes, and since the map $1 \otimes \lambda_r$ is multiplication by a non-zero scalar on a vector space, it follows that this map and therefore also $\lambda_r$ is monic, i.e., $M$ is torsionfree. 

In the other direction, suppose $M$ is torsionfree. Any module is the filtered colimit over the system of finitely generated submodules and inclusions between them; in this case all the finitely generated submodules of $M$ are torsion-free and hence free, by Proposition \ref{torsionfree}. Thus $M$ is a filtered colimit of free modules; it is therefore flat by a standard result proved [here](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/flat+module#filtfree). 
=-- 

### Structure theory of finitely generated modules 


[[!redirects principal ideal domains]]

