
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

When the [[theory]] of [[gravity]] in the form of _[[general relativity]]_ was developed at the beginning of the 20th century, the abstract notion of a [[smooth manifold]] independently of its [[coordinate charts]] was still unfamiliar, theories like that of [[electromagnetism]] were traditionally all formulated with respect to what today would be called a choice of [[coordinate patch]]. The development of [[general relativity]] by [[Albert Einstein]] went through a phase of in which what is now called the principle of _[[general covariance]]_ was only gradually understood.

The "hole argument" or "hole [[paradox]]", which was put forward in ([Einstein-Grossmann](#EinsteinGrossmann)), is the observation that given a [[pseudo-Riemannian metric|pseudo]]-[[Riemannian metric]] $g$ on some [[spacetime]] $X$ -- hence a field configuration of [[gravity]], and given a point $x : * \to X$ and a [[diffeomorphism]] $\phi : X \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} X$, in general the value of $g$ around $x$ is entirely unrelated to the value of the [[pullback of a cotensor|pullback]] metric $\phi^* g$ at $x$. 

This was regarded as a source of puzzlement for a while -- a "[[paradox]]" -- because if one thinks that the point $x$ in $X$ is absolutely fixed (the locus of an "observer" in spacetime) and that two metrics related by a [[diffeomorphism]] as above are equivalent field configuration, it would seem that the field of gravity "at $x$" is undetermined and underterminable. For a while this reasoning was regarded as an obstactle to the idea of [[general covariance]] and indeed in ([Einstein-Grossmann](#EinsteinGrossmann)) the notion of general covariance was still rejected in view of this.

But of course the value of the metric $g$ at $x$ _does_ coincide with that that of $\phi^* g$... at the transformed point $\phi(x)$. An attempt at more words on this is below in [Discussion](#Discussion).




## The "hole argument"
 {#TheArgument}

The original argument was formulated more in detail along the following lines.

In [[general relativity]], every chart of the [[atlas]] of the given spacetime represents the viewpoint of a physical observer.

Let $(X,\mu)$ be a [[spacetime]]. Let $\phi: V \subset X \to \mathbb{R}^4$ be a chart of $X$ such that there is an open, simply connected subset $U \subset \V$ with vanishing [[stress-energy tensor]] $T$ in $U$.

Assume that there are two points $a, b \in U$ such that the curvature vanishes in a neighborhood of $a$ and does not vanish near $b$. This means in terms of the [[differential geometry]] describing the situation that the [[pseudo-Riemannian metric]] $\mu$ on $X$ is [[Ricci-flat metric|Ricci flat]] when restricted to $U$ and flat when restricted to a neighborhood of $a$. 

Given these assumptions, there is a [[diffeomorphism]] $\psi: X \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} X$ (an [[isomorphism]] in [[Diff]]) reducing to the identity outside of $U$, with $\psi(a) = b$. Let $\mu' = \psi^*(\mu)$ be the pullback of $\mu$ along $\psi$. Since the field equations of [[general relativity]] are covariant (respect [[isomorphism]]s in the category of [[pseudo-Riemannian manifold]]s), both $\mu$ and $\mu'$ are solutions to the field equations. So one observer will say that there is no gravitation at the spacetime point $a$, while another will say there is.

## Discussion
 {#Discussion}

In fact, strictly speaking no observer will say anything like this, because it is impossible to characterize a single point $a$ in a [[spacetime]] in particular and in any [[manifold]] in general in an intrinsic way, without referring to extra structure: given a bare [[manifold]] $X$, a point $a$ in it is a [[morphism]] $x : {*} \to X$ in [[Diff]], a [[generalized element]] of $X$. But under an [[automorphism]] $X \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} X$ of $X$ in [[Diff]], this point is taken to any other point $b : * \stackrel{a}{\to} X \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} X$. So when regarded just by its probes by $*$, a manifold appears just as a bare [[set]] of points, with no interrelation. It is [[evil]] to try to distinguish these points, because in the [[slice category]] $(*,X)$ of elements, they are all isomorphic.

Rather, what really does characterize the [[manifold]] underlying a [[spacetime]] is its collection of all probes by the test spaces $\mathbb{R}^n$, i.e. by all morphisms $\mathbb{R}^n \to X$ in [[Diff]] and their relation among each other. The collection of information encoded by these probes yields the [[sheaf]] $\bar X := Hom_{Diff}(-,X) :$ [[CartSp]]${}^{op} \to Set$, and this does characterize the full structure of the manifold. For more on this see [[diffeological space]].

On the other hand, if there is extra structure available on the manifold $X$, such that for instance a "scalar field", i.e. a smooth function $\phi : X \to \mathbb{R}$, and if we take morphisms of such manifolds to respect this extra structure, then it is possible to intrinsically in an non-[[evil]] way characterize for instance the sub-set of points on which $f$ takes a fixed value. The scalar curvature invariants of a pseudo-Riemannian metric on $X$ do play such a role, and thus induce intrinsic observable structure. So what matters in the above example is not that one point is called $a$ and one is called $b$, but that at one point the Ricci curvature function vanishes, and at the other not. As a [[diffeomorphism]] is applied to the manifold, the points may be re-identitfied, but if the Ricci curvature vanished at one point before it will vanish at the re-identified point after the re-identitfication, and hence still characterizes that as one of the points where the Ricci curvature vanishes. So the apparent paradox in the above arises from insisting that $a$ is $a$ and $b$ is $b$ even after applying a diffeomorphism. This is [[evil]]. The diffeomorphism identifies $a$ with $b$ and $b$ with $a$ instead.

Notice that this argument has really nothing specifically to do with physics or general relativity. The analogue of what is said here about pseudo-Riemannian manifolds could be said about, say, [[symplectic manifold]]s or whatever.

So from the [[nPOV]] there is no mystery here, but the above argument originally troubled Einstein, because at his time it was felt that it violates the demand that the statement "at a certain region in time and space, there is (or isn't) gravitation" should have an objective, observer independent meaning, wether or not there is matter present that "feels" the influence of gravitation. This assumption is based on the Newtonian notions of the absolute, objective existence of space and time. For Newton's physics, space and time exist independently of any observers and of any objects that are present in time and space. If one adds a structure that models gravitation to space and time in this sense, the statement "at a certain region in time and space, there is (or isn't) gravitation" is independent of observers and of the presence of further content (or structures) like matter. 

The conclusion of Einstein and therefore of [[general relativity]] was however that the statement "at a certain region in time and space that contains no matter, there is (or isn't) gravitation" is _not_ independent of the observer. This means that the _physical_ notions of space and time do not have the same objective meaning as in Newton's physics.

On the other hand, the conclusion that one draws from the [[nPOV]] is a simpler and much more general one: it is [[evil]] to try to identify objects in a category in a way that does not respect their [[isomorphism]]s. 


## Related concepts

* [[general covariance]]

## References

* [[Albert Einstein]], M. Grossmann, _Entwurf einer verallgemeinerten Relativitätstheorie und einer Theorie der Gravitation_ Zeitschrift für Math. Phys. 62, 225–259 (1914)
 {#EinsteinGrossmann}


* Wikipedia, _[hole argument] (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hole_argument)_

[[!redirects hole paradox]]
