
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Group Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include group theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



# Semidirect products
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Definitions

If a [[group]] $G$ [[action|acts]] on a group $\Gamma$ (on the left, say) by group [[automorphism]]

$$  
  \rho : G \to Aut(\Gamma)
  \,,
$$

then there is a
__semidirect product__ group whose underlying set is the [[product]] $\Gamma \times  G$
but whose multiplication is twisted by $\rho$:

$$
  (\delta,h)(\gamma,g)= (\rho(h)(\delta) \gamma, h g)
$$

for $\delta, \gamma \in \Gamma,\; h,g \in G$, where $^h \gamma$ denotes the result of acting with $h$ on the left on $\gamma$. 

This is called in
[[group theory]] the **semidirect product** and written $\Gamma \rtimes \, G$.

There is a [[projection]] morphism $p:\Gamma \rtimes \, G \to G$ ,
$(\gamma, g) \to g$. A [[section]] $s$ of this can be identified with a
[[derivation]] $d$, i.e. $d$  satisfies $d(h g) = (d h) \,^h (d g)$.


### Interior semidirect products

Let $H$ be any group.  A decomposition of $H$ as an __internal__ semidirect product consists of a [[subgroup]] $\Gamma$ and a [[normal subgroup]] $G$, such that every element of $H$ can be written uniquely in the form $\gamma g$, for $\gamma \in \Gamma$ and $g \in G$.

The internal and external concepts are equivalent.  In particular, any (external) semidirect product $\Gamma \rtimes G$ is an internal semidirect product of the [[images]] of $\Gamma$ and $G$ in it.


### Right semidirect products

The definitions above are not symmetric in left and right; since the first definition begins with a left action, we may call it a *left* semidirect product.  Then a __right__ semidirect product is given by an action on the right, or internally by the requirement that every element can be written in the form $g \gamma$.

However, right and left semidirect products are equivalent.  Essentially, this is because any left action $(h,g) \mapsto {}^h{g}$ defines a right action $(g,h) \mapsto g^h \coloneqq {}^{h^{-1}}g$ and vice versa.


### Semidirect products of groupoids

It is useful to generalise this to the case $\Gamma$ is a [[groupoid]].
This occurs if for example $\Gamma = \pi_1 X$ where $X$ is a (left)
$G$-space.

So if $X=Ob(\Gamma)$, then $\Gamma \rtimes \, G$ has object set $X$ and
a morphism $y \to x$ is a pair $(\gamma,g)$ such that $\gamma: y \to
g x$ in $\Gamma$. The composition law is then given again by   

$$(\delta,h)(\gamma,g)= (\delta \, ^h \gamma, h g) $$

if  $(\delta, h): z \to y$, so that $\delta: z \to h y$ in $\Gamma$. 

If $\Gamma$ is a discrete groupoid, and so identified with $X$, then
we get $X \rtimes \, G$ which is the [[action groupoid]] of the action. In
this case the projection $p: X \rtimes \, G \to G$ is a covering
morphism of groupoids, i.e.  any $g \in G$ has a unique lifting with
given initial point. Note that if $Y \to X $ is a covering map of
spaces, then the induced morphism of fundamental groupoids is a
covering morphism of groupoids. If $q: H \to \pi_1 X$ is a covering
morphism of groupoids, and $X$ admits a universal covering map, then
there is a topology on $Y=Ob(H)$ such that $H \cong \pi_1 Y$. In
this way, the category of covering maps of $X$ is equivalent to the
category of covering morphisms of $\pi_1 X$.

The utility of the more general construction is that there is notion
of orbit groupoid $\Gamma //G$ (identify any $\gamma$ and $^g
\gamma$) and it is a theorem that the orbit groupoid is isomorphic to
the quotient groupoid

$$ (\Gamma \rtimes \, G)/N$$

where $N$ is the normal closure in $\Gamma \rtimes \, G$ of all
elements $(1_x,g)$. Details are in the book reference below (but the
conventions are not quite the same).


## References

A general survey is in 

* Wikipedia, _[Semidirect product](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semi-direct_product)_

Lecture notes include

* Patrick Morandi, _Semidirect products_ ([pdf](http://sierra.nmsu.edu/morandi/notes/semidirect.pdf))

Relevant textbooks include

* R. Brown, "Topology and groupoids", Booksurge 2006.

* P.J. Higgins and J. Taylor,  The Fundamental Groupoid and
  Homotopy Crossed Complex of an Orbit Space, in K.H. Kamps et al., ed.,
   Category Theory: Proceedings Gummersbach 1981, Springer LNM
  962  (1982) 115--122.


[[!redirects semidirect product]]
[[!redirects semidirect products]]
[[!redirects semi-direct product]]
[[!redirects semi-direct products]]
