
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Mathematics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include mathematicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[mathematics]] (also in [[mathematical physics]] and neighbouring disciplines) a [[theorem]] is sometimes said to be _folklore_ when the community feels that it has been around and generally accepted as true for a long time, without however a [[proof]] of it having been submitted and published in the usual manner.

For instance the [[cobordism hypothesis]] -- which is an intuitively  evident statement, whose formalization and proof, however, is notoriously subtle -- is referred to as "folklore" in [Stolz 14, p. vi](FQFT#Stolz14).

The sociology of folklore theorems can be subtle. In semi-formalized areas such as [[theoretical physics]] folklore convictions, correct ones and incorrect ones, have seriously impeded progress.

The (popular) claim that some statement is "well-known" -- without, however, there being a reference for it -- may signify folklore: If the truth of a statement really is well-known then it must be easy to give a definite reference for it. If it feels "well-known" but just doesn't have a definite reference, then it's folklore.


[[Paul Taylor]] on folklore in [[category theory]] ([Taylor, blog comment Sept 2012](http://math.andrej.com/2012/09/28/substitution-is-pullback/)):

> **folklore**, $[\ldots]$ is a technical term for a method of publication in category theory. It means that someone sketched it on the back of an envelope, mimeographed it (whatever that means) and showed it to three people in a seminar in Chicago in 1973, except that the only evidence that we have of these events is a comment that was overheard in another seminar at Columbia in 1976. Nevertheless, if some younger person is so presumptuous as to write out a proper proof and attempt to publish it, they will get shot down in flames.  

[[Clark Barwick]] on folklore in [[homotopy theory]]/[[algebraic topology]] ([Barwick 17, Item 3](homotopy+theory#Barwick17) ):

> We have no good culture of problems and conjectures. The people at the top of our field do not, as a rule, issue problems or programs of conjectures that shape our subject for years to come. In fact, in many cases, they simply announce results with only an outline of a proof -- _and never generate a complete proof_. Then, when others work to develop proofs, they are not said to have "solved a problem of So-and-So", rather, they have "completed the write-up of So-and-So's proof" or "given a proof of So-and-So's theorem". The ossification of a caste system -- in which one group has the general ideas and vision while another toils to realize that vision -- is no way for a subject to flourish. Other subjects have high-status visionaries who are no sketchier in details than those in homotopy theory, but whose unproved insights are nevertheless known as conjectures, problems, and programs.

## Related concepts

* [[conjecture]]

* [[theorem]], [[proposition]]

* [[proof]]

* [[analogy]]

## References

Paul Taylor's comment on folklore is quoted in 

* {#Aubert2019} Clément Aubert, _Categories for Me, and You?_, 2019 ([arxiv:1910.05172](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.05172)).


[[!redirects well-known]]
[[!redirects well known]]


