
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
#### Higher category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _coherence theorem for [[symmetric monoidal categories]]_, like many [[coherence theorems]], has several forms (or, alternatively, refers to several different theorems):

1. Every diagram in a free [[symmetric monoidal category]] made up of [[associators]] and [[unitors]] and symmetries, and in which both sides have the same underlying [[permutation]], commutes.

1. The free symmetric monoidal category on some given data is equivalent to the free [[symmetric strict monoidal category]] on the same data.

1. Every symmetric monoidal category is symmetric-monoidally equivalent to a symmetric strict monoidal category.

1. Every symmetric monoidal category is equivalent to an [[unbiased symmetric monoidal category]].

1. The forgetful 2-functor $SymMonCat \to SymStrMonCat$ has a strict [[left adjoint]] and the components of the unit are equivalences in $SymMonCat$.

Note that in a symmetric strict monoidal category, the associators and unitors are identities, but the symmetry is not in general.


## References

* [[Saunders Mac Lane]]. "Natural associativity and commutativity". Rice University Studies 49, 28-46 (1963). ([Rice Digital Scholarship Archive](https://scholarship.rice.edu/handle/1911/62865)) 

* [[Saunders Mac Lane]]. [[Categories for the Working Mathematician]] (Chapter 11).

* [[Andre Joyal]] and [[Ross Street]].  "Braided tensor categories".  *Adv. Math* 1993
