
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Higher category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{:toc}





## Idea

Pasting schemes are one possibility to give a rigorous treatment of  the (older) notational device of [[pasting diagrams]]. 


## Notions of pasting scheme 

More than one definition of *pasting scheme* has been used to give a justification to the practice of [[pasting diagrams]]. 

For example, there are pasting schemes in the sense of [Johnson 1987](#Johnson1987), and there are pasting schemes in the sense of [Power 1990](#Power1990). 

### Power's definition 

Power's notion is based on planar embeddings of [[quivers]] $Q$ that satisfy the following conditions: 

* $Q$ is [[finite set|finite]] and [[connected object|connected]]; 

* For the free category $F(Q)$ generated by $Q$, every [[endomorphism]] is an [[identity map|identity]] ($Q$ has no directed cycles); 

* There are vertices $s, t$ of $Q$ (the *source* and *sink*, respectively) such that for every vertex $v$, the hom-sets $F(Q)(s, v)$ and $F(Q)(v, t)$ are [[inhabited set|inhabited]] (there exist directed paths in $Q$ from $s$ to $v$ and from $v$ to $t$). 

We will call such quivers *progressive*, in rough analogy with progressive [[string diagrams]]. 

There is a restricted [[geometric realization]] functor 

$$Quiv = Set^{(0 \rightrightarrows 1)^{op}} \stackrel{skel}{\to} Set^{\Delta^{op}} \stackrel{R}{\to} Space$$ 

(into a [[convenient category of topological spaces]] $Space$) which we again denote as $R: Quiv \to Space$. 

+-- {: .num_defn} 
###### Definition 
**(after Power)** 
A *pasting scheme* consists of a progressive [[quiver]] $Q$ together with an subspace embedding $i: R(Q) \hookrightarrow \mathbb{R}^2$, such that $i$ is a $C^1$ embedding on each edge interior. 
=--



To each pasting scheme $(Q, i)$ we may associate a 2-[[computad]] $C = Comp(Q, i)$. Part of the computad structure is easily described: 

* The underlying quiver of $C$ is $Q$; 

* The elements of $C_2$ (the 2-cells) are the bounded [[connected components]] of $\mathbb{R}^2 \setminus i(R(Q))$. 

To complete the description of the computad, we need to define the source and target $\sigma(c), \tau(c) \in Mor(F(Q))$ of a 2-cell $c$. For each edge $e \in Q_1$ such that $i(e)$ lies in the boundary of $c$, and each interior point $x \in e$, we let $t(x) = i'(x)$ be the tangent vector, and $n(x)$ the inward-pointing normal (pointing into $c$); the $C^1$ embedding condition ensures that these make sense. Then say that $e$ is a *negative edge* of $c$ if 

$$\det \binom{t(x)}{n(x)} \lt 0$$ 

(the cell $c$ is "to the right" as $i$ is traversed along $e$) and a *positive edge* if 

$$\det \binom{t(x)}{n(x)} \gt 0$$ 

(the cell $c$ is to the left). 

Power shows that under the progressivity conditions, for each $c \in C_2$ there are unique distinct vertices $u, v$ such that the negative edges of $c$ form a directed path $\alpha \in F(Q)(u, v)$ from $u$ to $v$, and the positive edges of $c$ form a directed path $\beta \in F(Q)(u, v)$. We then define $\sigma(c) = \alpha$ and $\tau(c) = \beta$. 

*Power's pasting theorem* may be stated in the following form: 

+-- {: .num_theorem} 
###### Theorem 
For every pasting scheme $(Q, i)$, the free 2-category on the 2-computad $Comp(Q, i)$ has exactly one 2-morphism $\gamma$ whose $0$-domain is the source of $Q$ and whose $0$-codomain is the sink of $Q$. The $1$-domain of $\gamma$ is the directed path consisting of **positive** edges of the unique unbounded component of $\mathbb{R}^2 \setminus i(R(Q))$, and the $1$-codomain is the directed path consisting of **negative** edges of that component.  
=-- 

## Related concepts


* [[pasting diagram]]

* [[pasting law]] for [[pullbacks]]/[[homotopy pullbacks]]

## References




The notion of pasting in a [[2-category]] was introduced in

* [[Jean Bénabou]], _Introduction to bicategories_, in _Lecture Notes in Mathematics_ Vol. 47, pp. l-77, Springer-Verlag, New York/Berlin, (1967)



* [[Michael Johnson]]: _Pasting Diagrams in $n$-Categories with Applications to Coherence Theorems and Categories of Paths_, Doctoral Thesis, University of Sydney, 1987
{#Johnson1987}



* [[Michael Johnson]]: _The Combinatorics of $n$-Categorical Pasting_, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 62 (1989) 
{#Johnson1989}


* [[John Power]]: _A 2-Categorical Pasting Theorem_, Journal of Algebra 129 (1990) 
{#Power1990} 




Other notions of pasting presentations have been given by Street ([[parity complexes]]) and by Steiner, 

* [[Ross Street]], _Parity complexes_, Cahiers Top. G&eacute;om Diff. Cat&eacute;goriques 32 (1991), 315-343. ([link](http://archive.numdam.org/ARCHIVE/CTGDC/CTGDC_1991__32_4/CTGDC_1991__32_4_315_0/CTGDC_1991__32_4_315_0.pdf)) Corrigenda, Cahiers Top. G&eacute;om Diff. Cat&eacute;goriques 35 (1994), 359-361. ([link](http://archive.numdam.org/ARCHIVE/CTGDC/CTGDC_1994__35_4/CTGDC_1994__35_4_359_0/CTGDC_1994__35_4_359_0.pdf))

* Richard Steiner, The algebra of directed complexes, Appl. Cat. Struct. 1 (1993), 247-284. 



[[!redirects pasting schemes]]
















