
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# The adjoint triangle theorem
* automatic table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

The **adjoint triangle theorem** is a useful item in the categorist's toolbox as it gives conditions under which, given a pair of functors and an adjoint, further adjoints exist.

Depending on the specific assumptions, the theorem has several variants. The following gives the most common formulation going back to [Dubuc (1968)](#dubuc68).

## Statement ##

+-- {: .num_theorem #ATT}
###### Theorem
Suppose that $U:B\to C$ is a [[functor]] which has a [[left adjoint]] $F:C\to B$ with the property that the diagram
$$ F U F U \;\underoverset{\epsilon F U}{F U \epsilon}{\rightrightarrows}\; F U \xrightarrow{\epsilon} 1_B $$
is a pointwise [[coequalizer]] (i.e. $U$ is of [[descent type]]).  Suppose that $A$ is a category with coequalizers of reflexive pairs; then a functor $R:A\to B$ has a left adjoint if and only if the composite $U R$ does.
=--
+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof
The direction "only if" is obvious since adjunctions compose.  For "if", let $F'$ be a left adjoint of $U R$, and define $L:B\to A$ to be the pointwise coequalizer of
$$ F' U F U \xrightarrow{F' U \epsilon} F' U $$
and
$$
  F' U F U \xrightarrow{F' U \theta U}
  F' U R F' U \xrightarrow{\epsilon' F' U}
  F' U
$$
where $\theta:F \to R F'$ is the [[mate]] of the equality $U R = U R$ under the adjunctions $F\dashv U$ and $F'\dashv U R$.  One then verifies that this works.
=--

+-- {: .num_remark #Monadic}
###### Remark
The hypotheses on $U$ are satisfied whenever it is [[monadic functor|monadic]].
=--

+-- {: .num_remark #RegMono}
###### Remark
In fact, it suffices to assume that each counit $\epsilon : F U b \to b$ is a [[regular epimorphism]], rather than it is the coequalizer of a specific given pair of maps.  See [(Street-Verity), Lemma 2.1](#StreetVerity).
=--

## Ramifications

Similarly, the [[adjoint lifting theorem]] states conditions on a square of functors in order to ensure the existence of certain adjoints. Since a triangle can be viewed as a square with 'two sides composed', it is possible to deduce the adjoint lifting theorem from the adjoint triangle theorem as a corollary.

## Related entries

* [[adjoint functor theorem]]

* [[adjoint lifting theorem]]

## References ##

* [[Michael Barr]], [[Charles Wells]], _Toposes, Triples and Theories_ , Springer Heidelberg 1985. (Reprinted as [TAC reprint no.12](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/reprints/articles/12/tr12abs.html) (2005); section 3.7, pp.131ff) 

* {#dubuc68}[[Eduardo Dubuc]], _Adjoint triangles_, pp.69-81 in LNM **61** Springer Heidelberg 1968.

* I. B. Im, [[Max Kelly|G. M. Kelly]], _Adjoint-Triangle Theorems for Conservative Functors_ , Bull. Austral. Math. Soc. **36** (1987) pp.133-136.

* [[John Power]], _A unified approach to the lifting of adjoints_ , Cah. Top. Géom. Diff. Cat. **XXIX** no.1 (1988) pp.67-77. ([numdam](http://www.numdam.org/item/CTGDC_1988__29_1_67_0))

* [[Ross Street]], [[Dominic Verity]], _The comprehensive factorization and torsors_ , TAC **23** no.3 (2010) pp.42-75. ([abstract](http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/23/3/23-03abs.html))
{#StreetVerity}

* [[Walter Tholen]], _Adjungierte Dreiecke, Colimites und Kan-Erweiterungen_ , Math. Ann. **217** (1975) pp.121-129. ([gdz](http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/img/?PPN=GDZPPN002311682))

Generalizations of the adjoint triangle theorem to [[2-categories]] are considered in

* Fernando Lucatelli Nunes, *On biadjoint triangles*, [TAC](http://tac.mta.ca/tac/volumes/31/9/31-09abs.html)

* Fernando Lucatelli Nunes, *On lifting of biadjoints and lax algebras*, [arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.03087)

[[!redirects adjoint triangle]]
[[!redirects adjoint triangles]]
