# Contents

* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}


## Idea



## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition
Let $C$ be a [[category]].  Let $A$ be a [[full]] [[subcategory]] of $C$.  We define a functor $C \to \Fun(A^\text{op},\Set)$ in the obvious way: on objects, $c$ goes to the functor $a \mapsto C(a,c)$.


We say that $A$ is **left adequate in $C$** if this functor is [[full]] and [[faithful]].

If, in addition, there is a [[small]] subcategory $B$ of $A$ with the property that every morphism from an object in $A$ to an object in $C$ factors through an object in $B$ then $A$ is said to be **properly left adequate**.
=--

There are also the dual notions of *right adequate* and *properly right adequate*.

+-- {: .num_defn #adequate}
###### Definition
Let $C$ be a [[category]] and $A$ a [[full]] [[subcategory]] of $C$.  We say that $A$ is **adequate** (resp. **properly adequate**) if it is both left and right adequate (resp. properly adequate).
=--

## Properties

The relation of being left (or right) adequate is not transitive.  However, being adequate is transitive.

## Examples

1. Let $V$ be a category of [[algebras]] and $n \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $V$ has a presentation with operations of at most arity $n$.  Let $v$ be the free $V$-algebra on $n$ generators.  Then the full subcategory with object $v$ is left adequate in $V$.

1. In $\Set$, a singleton space is left adequate.  In the absence of [[measurable cardinals]], a countable space is right adequate.

1. A square is right adequate for compact spaces.

## References

* Isbell, J. R. (1960). Adequate subcategories. _Illinois J. Math._, _4_, 541&ndash;552. [MR0175954](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=0175954)
