
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Quantum field theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functorial quantum field theory - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Turaev-Viro model_ is a 3-dimensional [[topological quantum field theory]] construction induced from a [[modular tensor category]]. It is something like the "norm square" of the [[Reshetikhin-Turaev construction]] on $\mathcal{C}$.

## References

The original article is

* V. G. Turaev and O. Ya. Viro, _State sum invariants of 3-manifolds and quantum 6jsymbols_, Topology 31 (1992), no. 4, 865–902, DOI 10.1016/0040-9383(92)90015-A.
MR1191386 (94d:57044

* [[John Barrett]], [[Bruce Westbury]], _Invariants of piecewise-linear 3-manifolds_, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 348 (1996), no. 10, 3997–4022, DOI 10.1090/S0002-9947-
96-01660-1. MR1357878 (97f:57017)

Refinement of the construction to an [[extended TQFT]] is in 

* Alexander Kirillov Jr., Benjamin Balsam, _Turaev-Viro invariants as an extended TQFT_

Discussion that relates the [[geometric quantization]] of $G$-[[Chern-Simons theory]] to the [[Reshetikhin-Turaev construction]] of a 3d-[[TQFT]] from the [[modular tensor category]] induced by $G$ is in 

* [[Jørgen Andersen]], _A geometric formula for the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev Quantum Invariants and some applications_ ([arXiv:1206.2785](arxiv.org/abs/1206.2785))
 {#Andersen}

and references cited there.


A relation to the [[Levin-Wen model]] is discussed in

* Alexander Kirillov Jr, _String-net model of Turaev-Viro invariants_ ([arXiv:1106.6033](http://arxiv.org/abs/1106.6033))


[[!redirects Turaev-Viro construction]]
