+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

In the strict sense of the word, a _cartesian product_ is a [[product]] in [[Set]], the category of [[sets]].

More generally, one says _cartesian product_ to mean the  [[product]] in any [[cartesian monoidal category]] and to distinguish it from other [[tensor product]]s that this may carry.

For instance one speaks of the cartesian product on [[Cat]] and on [[2Cat]] in contrast to the [[Gray tensor product]].


## Definition 

Given any family $(A_i)_{i:I}$ of sets, the __cartesian product__ $\prod_i A_i$ of the family is the set of all [[functions]] $f$ from the index set $I$ with $f_j$ in $A_j$ for each $j$ in $I$.

As stated, the [[target]] of such a function depends on the argument, which is natural in dependent [[type theory]]; but if you don't like this, then define $\prod_i A_i$ to be the set of those functions $f$ from $I$ to the [[disjoint union]] $\biguplus_i A_i$ such that $f_j \in A_j$ (treating $A_j$ as a [[subset]] of $\biguplus_i A_i$ as usual) for each $j$ in $I$.

In traditional forms of [[set theory]], one can also take the target of $f$ to be the [[union]] $\bigcup_i A_i$ or even the class of all objects (equivalently, leave it unspecified).


## Examples

### Products of sets

Given [[sets]] $A$ and $B$, the cartesian product of the binary family $(A,B)$ is written $A \times B$; its elements $(a,b)$ are called __[[ordered pairs]]__.  (In [[set theory]], one often makes a special definition for this case, defining
$$ (a,b) = \{\{a\},\{a,b\}\} $$
rather than as a function so that ordered pairs can then be used in the definition of function.  From a structural perspective, however, this is unnecessary.)

Given sets $A_1$ through $A_n$, the cartesian product of the $n$-ary family $(A_1,\ldots,A_n)$ is written $\prod_{i=1}^n A_i$; its elements $(a_1,\ldots,a_n)$ are called __ordered $n$-[[tuples]]__.

Given sets $A_1$, $A_2$, etc, the cartesian product of the countably infinitary family $(A_1,A_2,\ldots)$ is written $\prod_{i=1}^\infty A_i$; its elements $(a_1,a_2,\ldots,)$ are called __infinite [[sequences]]__.

Given a set $A$, the cartesian product of the unary family $(A)$ may be identified with $A$ itself; that is, we identify the __ordered [[singleton]]__ $(a)$ with $a$.

The cartesian product of the empty family $()$ is the [[point]], a set whose only element is the __[[empty list]]__ $()$; we often call this set $1$ (or $\pt$, when we\'re Urs) and write its element as $*$.

### Further examples

* In categories of algebras, products are constructed in the "obvious" manner; see for example [[direct product group]]. 

For [[algebraic categories]] like [[Grp]], where the objects are sets equipped with (globally defined) specified operations that satisfy specified universally quantified identities, products are always constructed in the way you'd expect, viz. by taking products at the level of the underlying sets and endowing them with operations defined in the evident pointwise fashion, just like the way it works in $Grp$. More commentary on this in more general contexts will be given below.  

* For a non-example: the category of [[fields]] does not admit products, even though some might consider that an algebraic example (in some loose or informal sense). 

* In categories of topological type, products are again constructed in a common sense manner; see for instance [[product topological space]] for a prototype. 

For [[topological categories]], which include examples like [[Top]] and [[Preord]], products are always constructed in the way one expects, by taking products at the level of the underlying sets and endowing them with an initial lift structure; e.g., in the case of $Top$, the smallest or initial topology for which the projection maps are continuous. 

This principle continues to hold even for *infinitary* products, where the correct structure might not be obvious without guidance from categorical considerations. For example, for topological spaces, for an infinite product $\prod_{i \in I} X_i$, we use the product topology, and not say the [[box topology]] which might be the first thing one would try. 

* In any [[presheaf category]], i.e., a category of type $Set^C$ where $C$ is a [[small category]], products are calculated in obvious pointwise fashion, where $(F \times G)(c) = F(c) \times G(c)$ with the pointwise product projection maps. This even works if $C$ is [[large category|large]] (making $Set^C$ 'very large'). 

* If $D$ has products and $C \hookrightarrow D$ is a [[reflective subcategory]], products in $C$ exist and are calculated as they are in $D$. For example, this applies to any [[Grothendieck topos]], as a category of [[sheaves]] on a [[site]] forming a reflective subcategory of a category of presheaves (on the underlying category of the site). 

  * For instance, the category [[Pos]] of [[posets]] is a reflective subcategory of [[Preord]]. 
  * Any [[locally presentable category]] can be exhibited as a reflective subcategory of a presheaf topos; as such we know how to calculate products there. 
  
* Generalizing the last example still further, if $U: A \to X$ is a [[monadic functor]], then products and more generally [[limits]] in $A$ are created (or [[reflected limit|reflected]]) from products/limits in $X$. In other words, products of algebras over a [[monad]] $T: X \to X$ are given by products in $X$, equipped with the evident "pointwise" $T$-algebra structure. 

* If $D$ has products and $i: C \hookrightarrow D$ is a *[[coreflective subcategory|coreflective]]* subcategory, where $i$ has a right adjoint (co-reflector) $r$, then products in $C$ can be formed by taking products in $D$ and then applying $r$. 

  * For example, the category $CG$ of [[compactly generated spaces]] is coreflective in [[Top]]. The product in $CG$ does not coincide in general with the topological product. 

* Products in $C^{op}$ are given by [[coproducts]] in $C$. 

  * In some cases, this formal tautology gives the only sensible way to construct products. For example, to form products $X \times Y$ in the category [[Loc]] of [[locales]], one must take the formal dual of the coproduct (denoted $\mathcal{O}(X) \otimes \mathcal{O}(Y)$) in the category of [[frames]]. 

  * Similarly, the product of two [[affine schemes]] is the formal dual of the coproduct of their corresponding coordinate rings, again given by a tensor product. 

* Relative to a [[symmetric monoidal category]] $C$ with monoidal product $\otimes$, products in the category of [[cocommutative comonoids]] are given by the tensor product $X \otimes Y$ in the underlying smc category. 

  * For instance, this is how products of [[cocommutative coalgebras]] are formed. This applies for instance to cocommutative [[Hopf algebras]]. 
  * In a [[cartesian bicategory]] such as $Rel$, the accompanying category of objects and *maps* (= left adjoint 1-cells) coincides with the category of cocommutative comonoids and comonoid maps between them (which is $Set$ in the case of $Rel$. Thus the usual tensor product in $Rel$ coincides with the cartesian product in $Set$. 

* For categories $C$ enriched in the category of [[commutative monoids]], finite products are [[biproducts]] and hence coincide with coproducts in a controlled fashion (via [[matrices]]). However, this is usually not the case for infinite products. For such examples, finite products are [[absolute limits]]. 

* In the category [[SupLat]] of [[sup-lattices]], arbitrary products coincide with coproducts (and in fact the functor $X \mapsto X^{op}$ that takes a sup-lattice to its posetal opposite is part of a perfect duality $SupLat^{op} \to SupLat$, taking a sup-lattice map $f: X \to Y$ to $g^{op}: Y^{op} \to X^{op}$ where $f \dashv g$). This example descends to $Rel$ itself, so we conclude that products in $Rel$ are actually given by coproducts in $Rel$ which in turn are given by coproducts in $Set$. 


## Foundational status

In [[material set theory]], the existence of binary cartesian products follows from the [[axiom of pairing]] and the axiom of [[weak replacement]] (which is very weak).  In [[structural set theory]], their existence generally must be stated as an axiom: the __axiom of products__.  See [[ordered pair]] for more details.


## Related entries

* [[cartesian monoidal category]]

category: foundational axiom

[[!redirects cartesian product]]
[[!redirects cartesian products]]
[[!redirects Cartesian product]]
[[!redirects Cartesian products]]
[[!redirects product set]]
[[!redirects product sets]]
[[!redirects product of sets]]
[[!redirects products of sets]]

[[!redirects axiom of cartesian products]]
[[!redirects axiom of Cartesian products]]
[[!redirects axiom of products]]

