A form of [[PBW theorem]] says that the symmetric algebra and the universal algebra of a Lie algebra $g$ are isomorphic as vector spaces (in fact coalgebras and $g$-modules). However this is not an isomorphism of algebras. One can compose the PBW isomorphism with an additional automorphism to get an isomorphism of vector spaces which restricts to isomorphism of __algebras__ when restricted to the subalgebras of $g$-invariant functions. 

The original proof by Duflo is rather case by case, using the structure theory of Lie algebras. Kontsevich in 1998 gave a new proof which generalizes to some geometric situations in deformation quantization. 

* M. Duflo, _Opérateurs différentiels bi-invariants sur un groupe de Lie_, Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4) 10 (1977), 265–288 [MR56:3188](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=56:3188) [numdam](http://numdam.org/numdam-bin/fitem?id=ASENS_1977_4_10_2_265_0) 
* Damien Calaque, Carlo A. Rossi, _Lectures on Duflo isomorphisms in Lie algebra and complex geometry_, European Math. Soc. 2011
* [[M. Kontsevich]], _Deformation quantization of Poisson manifolds_, Lett. Math. Phys. __66__ (2003), no. 3, 157–216; _Operads and motives in deformation quantization_, Lett. Math. Phys. __48__ (1999), no. 1, 35–72.
* A. Brochier, _A Duflo star-product for Poisson groups_, [arxiv/1604.08450](http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.08450)

> Let $G$ be a finite-dimensional Poisson algebraic, Lie or formal group. We show that the center of the quantization of $G$ provided by an Etingof--Kazhdan functor is isomorphic as an algebra to the Poisson center of the algebra of functions on $G$. This recovers and generalizes Duflo's theorem which gives an isomorphism between the center of the enveloping algebra of a finite dimensional Lie algebra $\mathfrak{a}$ and the subalgebra of ad-invariant in the symmetric algebra of $\mathfrak{a}$. As our proof relies on Etingof--Kazhdan construction it ultimately depends on the existence of Drinfeld associators, but otherwise it is a fairly simple application of graphical calculus. This shed some lights on Alekseev--Torossian proof of the Kashiwara--Vergne conjecture, and on the relation observed by Bar-Natan--Le--Thurston between the Duflo isomorphism and the Kontsevich integral of the unknot. 

[[!redirects Duflo map]]
