
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Graph theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include graph theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea



In just about any concept of [[graph]], an **edge** is something which *connects two [[vertex|vertices]]*. 
Whether an *edge* contains directional information, depends on the definition of [[graph]] used.  
In the usual sense of "graph" in contemporary combinatoris, "edge" means a *nondirectional connection between two things*, carrying no information other than these two things being related. 

If the [[graph]] underlies a [[category]] then an edge is a morphism.

If the [[graph]] underlies a [[simplicial set]] then an edge is a 1-[[dimension|dimensional]] [[simplex]].



## Terminological comments

The canonical etymological explanation of why, even in abstract graphs, the connections are almost invariably called "edges" in modern graph theory is to see "edge" as a trace of the natural connections between [[graph theory]] and the theory of [[polyhedra]], in particular, as a legacy of  [[Ernst Steinitz|Steinitz's]] [[Steinitz's theorem|1916 theorem]] on the one-dimensional skeleta of [[polyhedra]] in three-dimensional [[Euclidean space]].
Some deplore the geometric connotations of "edge", with its geometric connotations of straightness and rigidity
The term "edge" is clearly the most usual one in modern graph theory by far. 

An alternative term, unusual in contemporary graph-theory and considered old-fashioned, is 'line'. (Cf., notably, [Chapter 2](#HararyGraphTheory) and many other articles of Harary's). 
The word 'line' lives on to this day in the standard technical term [[line graph]], while "edge graph" does not even lexically exist. 




## Related concepts

* [[vertex]], [[simplex]], [[dendrex]]

[[!redirects edges]]



## References


* Frank Harary: Graph Theory. Addison-Wesley. 1969
{#HararyGraphTheory}


## Related concepts

* [[vertex]], [[simplex]], [[dendrex]]

[[!redirects edges]]
