
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Bundles
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include bundles - contents]]
=--
#### Linear algebra
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include homotopy - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

For $E_1, E_2 \to X$ two [[vector bundles]], their [[direct sum]] over $X$, also called their **Whitney sum**, is the vector bundle $E_1 \oplus E_2 \to X$ whose [[fiber]] over any $x \in X$ is the [[direct sum]] of vector spaces of the fibers of $E_1$ and $E_2$.

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn #DirectSumOfTopologicalVectorBundles}
###### Definition
**(direct sum of [[topological vector bundles]])**

Let $X$ be a [[topological space]], and let $E_1 \to X$ and $E_2 \to X$ be two [[topological vector bundles]] over $X$. 

Let $\{U_i \subset X\}_{i \in I}$ be an [[open cover]] with respect to which both vector bundles locally trivialize (this always exists: pick a [[local trivialization]] of either bundle and form the joint [[refinement]] of the respective [[open covers]] by [[intersection]] of their patches). Let 

$$
  \left\{
    (g_1)_{i j}
    \colon U_i \cap U_j \to GL(n_1)
  \right\}
  \phantom{AAA}
  \text{and}  
  \phantom{AAA}
  \left\{
    (g_2)_{i j}
    \colon
     U_i \cap U_j \longrightarrow GL(n_2)
  \right\}
$$

be the [[transition functions]] of these two bundles with respect to this cover.

For $i, j \in I$ write

$$
  \array{
    (g_i)_{i j} \oplus (g_2)_{i j}
    &\colon&
    U_i \cap U_j
      &\longrightarrow&
    GL(n_1 + n_2)
    \\
    &&
    x 
      &\overset{\phantom{AAA}}{\mapsto}&
    \left(
      \array{
         (g_1)_{i j}(x) & 0
         \\
         0 & (g_2)_{i j}(x)
      }
    \right)
  }
$$

be the pointwise [[direct sum]] of these transition functions

Then the _direct sum bundle_ $E_1 \oplus E_2$ is the one glued from this direct sum of the transition functions (by [this construction](topological+vector+bundle#TopologicalVectorBundleFromCechCocycle)):

$$
  E_1 \oplus E_2
  \;\coloneqq\;
  \left(
    \left( \underset{i}{\sqcup} U_i \right)
    \times 
    \left(
      \mathbb{R}^{n_1 + n_2}
    \right)
  \right)/ \left( \left\{ (g_1)_{i j} \oplus (g_2)_{i j} \right\}_{i,j \in I} \right)
  \,.
$$
 

=--

## Properties

+-- {: .num_prop }
###### Proposition

Let $X$ be a [[paracompact topological space]] and let $E \to X$ be a [[topological vector bundle]]. Then every vector subbundle $E_1 \hookrightarrow E$ is a direct vector bundle summand, in that there exists another vector subbundle $E_2 \hookrightarrow E$ such that their direct sum of vector bundles (def. \ref{DirectSumOfTopologicalVectorBundles}) is $E$

$$
  E_1 \oplus E_2 \simeq E
  \,.
$$

=--

([e.g. Hatcher, prop. 1.3](#Hatcher))

+-- {: .num_prop #Smooth0TypeIsSheavesOnSmoothMfd}
###### Proposition

Let 

1. $X$ be a [[compact Hausdorff space]];

1. $E \to X$ a [[topological vector bundle]].

Then there exists another topological vector bundle $\tilde E \to X$ such that the direct sum of vector bundles (def. \ref{DirectSumOfTopologicalVectorBundles}) of the two is a trivial vector $X \times \mathbb{R}^n$:

$$
  E \oplus \tilde E
   \;\simeq\;
  X \times \mathbb{R}^n
  \,.
$$

=--

(e.g. [Hatcher, prop. 1.4](#Hatcher), [Friedlander, ptop. 3.1](#Friedlander))

Prop. \ref{Smooth0TypeIsSheavesOnSmoothMfd} is key for the construction of [[topological K-theory]] groups on compact Hausdorff spaces.


## Related concepts

* [[tensor product of vector bundles]], [[dual vector bundle]], [[tensor category]]

* [[Stiefel-Whitney class]]

* [[virtual vector bundle]], [[topological K-theory]]

* [[framed manifold]], [[Thom spectrum]]

## References

Discussion with an eye towards [[topological K-theory]] is in

* [[Max Karoubi]], _K-theory. An introduction_, Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften __226__, Springer 1978. xviii+308 pp.


* {#Hatcher} [[Allen Hatcher]], _Vector bundles and K-Theory_, (partly finished book) [web](http://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/VBKT/VBpage.html)

and with an eye towards [[algebraic K-theory]] in

* {#Friedlander} [[Eric Friedlander]], _An introduction to K-theory_ (emphasis on [[algebraic K-theory]]), 2007 ([pdf](http://users.ictp.it/~pub_off/lectures/lns023/Friedlander/Friedlander.pdf))



[[!redirects Whitney sum]]

[[!redirects direct sums of vector bundles]]
