
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Gravity
+--{: .hide}
[[!include gravity contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The [[standard model of cosmology]] including [[dark energy]] and [[dark matter]] is in very good agreement with observation on scales above those of galaxies, but in its standard version becomes problematic below this scale (there are variants that address this, such as [[fuzzy dark matter]]).

Curiously though, the particular behaviour of experimental data on these "small" cosmological scales turns out to have a remarkably simple and universal phenomenological fit by a simple modification of the [[force]] law of [[Newtonian mechanics]] ("Newton's third law", corrections from [[general relativity]] are typically very small for the effects in question). 

_MOND_ is the abbreviation for this _modified Newtonian dynamics_ ([Milgrom 83 a](#Milgrom83a), [Milgrom 83 b](#Milgrom83b), [Milgrom 83 c](#Milgrom83c)). This refers to the proposal of modifying Newton's third law 

$$
  F = m a
$$

relating the [[force]] experienced by a body of [[mass]] $m$ to its [[acceleration]] $a$ by an expression of the form

$$
  F = m \,\mu(a/a_0)\, a
$$

for some acceleration scale $a_0$ and some interpolating function $\mu \colon \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}$.

The motivation is that choosing the constant $a_0$ and the function $\mu$ suitably, then such a modified formula fits the rotation-velocities of observed [[galaxies]] in dependence of the [[radius]] remarkably well, something which the [[standard model of cosmology]] with [[dark matter]] still has some problems with (but see [Kaplinghat-Turner 02](#KaplinghatTurner02), [BLSF 09](#BLSF09), [Chan 13](#Chan13)). 

Of course an ad-hoc such modification of the basic laws of physics breaks many established properties of physics, such as the [[principle of equivalence]] in [[general relativity]] and various [[conservation laws]]. It must be that this modified Newtonian force law is the effect of some more fundamental theory. The only proposal for such a theory apart from [[gravity]]+[[dark matter]] itself ([Kaplinghat-Turner 02](#KaplinghatTurner02), [BLSF 09](#BLSF09), [Chan 13](#Chan13)) is to add to Einstein gravity a unit vector field and a [[scalar field]] ([Bekenstein 04](#Bekenstein04), "TeVeS"), themselves thus otherwise unobserved "dark fields", as it were,  but, as opposed to say the [[axion]] dark matter candidate, not motivated beyond the desire to fit galaxy rotation curves.


## Related concepts

* An alternative proposal is that of [[fuzzy dark matter]], where the theory of gravity is left as is, but one assumes that there is [[dark matter]] which is so extremely light that its [[de Broglie wavelength]] is of the scales of galaxies. Such [[fuzzy dark matter]] models make the same prediction as cold dark matter on cosmological scales, but change behaviour on scales of galaxies due to the [[quantum physics|quantum]] nature of these light particles becoming relevant here. This change of behaviour has been argued to account for the kind of effects that MOND is a fit for.

## References

### Original articles

The concept of MOND is due to

* {#Milgrom83a} [[Mordehai Milgrom]], _A modification of the Newtonian dynamics as a possible alternative to the hidden mass hypothesis_, Astrophysical Journal. 270: 365–370. (1983) doi:10.1086/161130.

* {#Milgrom83b} [[Mordehai Milgrom]], _A modification of the Newtonian dynamics - Implications for galaxies_, Astrophysical Journal. 270: 371–389. (1983) doi:10.1086/161131.

* {#Milgrom83c} [[Mordehai Milgrom]], _A modification of the Newtonian dynamics - Implications for galaxy systems_, Astrophysical Journal. 270: 384. (1983) doi:10.1086/161132

and its most popular relativistic completion TeVeS is due to

* {#Bekenstein04} [[Jacob Bekenstein]], _Relativistic gravitation theory for the modified Newtonian dynamics paradigm_, Physical Review D, 70 (8): 083509, ([arXiv:astro-ph/0403694](https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0403694))

### Review

General review includes

* Benoît Famaey and Stacy S. McGaugh, _Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND): Observational Phenomenology and Relativistic Extensions_,2012, Living Reviews in Relativity, 15, 10  ([arXiv:1112.3960](https://arxiv.org/abs/1112.3960))

* Joe Silk, Gary A. Mamon, _The Current Status of Galaxy Formation_ ([arXiv:1207.3080](http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3080))

* Wikipedia, _[Modified Newtonian dynamics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modified_Newtonian_dynamics)_

* Wikipedia, _[Tensor–vector–scalar gravity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tensor%E2%80%93vector%E2%80%93scalar_gravity)_


### Experimental constraints

The stark failure of plain MOND to fit data on large cosmological scales is highlighted in

* {#Dodelson11} Scott Dodelson, _The Real Problem with MOND_,  Int. J. Mod. Phys. D, 20, 2749 (2011).  ([arXiv:1112.1320](https://arxiv.org/abs/1112.1320))

The instability of its relativistic completion by TeVeS was pointed out in 

* Michael D. Seifert, _Stability of spherically symmetric solutions in modified theories of gravity_, Phys.Rev.D76:064002, 2007 ([arXiv:gr-qc/0703060](https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0703060))

{#ConstraintsFromMergingNeutronStars} The detection of [[gravitational waves]] coincident with [[electromagnetic radiation]] from merging [[neutron stars]] (event GW170817, [LIGO-Virgo 17](LIGO-Virgo#LIGOVirgo17)) constrains relatvistic completions of MOND:

* Jose María Ezquiaga, Miguel Zumalacárregui, _Dark Energy after GW170817_ ([arXiv:1710.05901](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.05901))

* Sibel Boran, Shantanu Desai, Emre Kahya, Richard Woodard, _GW170817 Falsifies Dark Matter Emulators_ ([arXiv:1710.06168](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.06168))

### MOND phenomenology from actual dark matter

Derivations of the MOND phenomenology from actual [[dark matter]] is discussed in the following articles:

* {#KaplinghatTurner02} Manoj Kaplinghat, Michael S. Turner, _How Cold Dark Matter Theory Explains Milgrom's Law_, Astrophys.J. 569 (2002) L19 ([arXiv:astro-ph/0107284](https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0107284))

* {#BLSF09} Jean-Philippe Bruneton, Stefano Liberati, Lorenzo Sindoni, Benoit Famaey, _Reconciling MOND and dark matter?_, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics, Issue 03, pp. 021 (2009) ([arXiv:0811.3143](https://arxiv.org/abs/0811.3143))

* {#Chan13} Man Ho Chan, _Reconciliation of MOND and Dark Matter theory_, Phys. Rev. D, 88, 103501 (2013) ([arXiv:1310.6801](https://arxiv.org/abs/1310.6801))

and specifically for [[axion|axionic]] [[fuzzy dark matter]]:

* {#HOTW16} Lam Hui, Jeremiah P. Ostriker, Scott Tremaine, [[Edward Witten]], _On the hypothesis that cosmological dark matter is composed of ultra-light bosons_,  Phys. Rev. D 95, 043541 (2017) ([arXiv:1610.08297](https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.08297))

and for fuzzy dark matter with [[superfluid]]-effects includes in

* {#BerezhianiKhoury15} [[Lasha Berezhiani]], [[Justin Khoury]], _Theory of Dark Matter Superfluidity_, Phys. Rev. D 92, 103510 (2015) ([arXiv:1507.01019](https://arxiv.org/abs/1507.01019))

* {#Khoury16} [[Justin Khoury]], _Another Path for the Emergence of Modified Galactic Dynamics from Dark Matter Superfluidity_, Phys. Rev. D 93, 103533 (2016) ([arXiv:1602.05961](https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.05961))

 
