Classical logic is the form of [[logic]] usually accepted and taught as standard among working mathematicians, and traced back (at least) to Aristotle.  Some particular features that distinguish classical logic are (perhaps not a complete list):

* a [[distributive lattice]] of logical operations ($\wedge$ and $\vee$);
* the [[structural rule]]s of weakening, contraction, and (where meaningful) exchange;
* an involutory [[negation]].

In contrast, [[minimal logic|minimal]], [[intuitionistic logic|intuitionistic]], and (some forms of) [[paraconsistent logic|paraconsistent]] logics have the distributive lattice and the structural rules but no involutory negation.  On the other hand, [[linear logic]] and (other forms of) paraconsistent logic have the distributive lattice and the involutory negation but lack some structural rules.  Then again, [[quantum logic]] and (yet other forms of) paraconsistent logic have the structural rules and the involutory negation but lack the distributive lattice. 

In [[category theory]] (and in the [[foundations]] of mathematics generally), it is intuitionistic logic that is most often contrasted to classical logic; the difference is given by the law of [[excluded middle]], which holds classically but not intuitionistically.

## Classical propositional logic 

Before describing what makes a propositional logic 'classical', let us quickly recall what propositional logic is in the first place. 

In general, a (deductive) [[logic]] specifies rules of syntax for forming well-formed formulas which can be considered as assertions, and rules of inference for deriving one formula (called a 'conclusion') from other formulas (called 'premises'), in such a way that truth of the conclusion follows on the assumption of truth of the premises. In short, a formal logic specifies a mode of reasoning that is considered valid for a particular mathematical context. 

In [[propositional logic]], one forms a formula by applying basic logical operations such as $\wedge$ ('and'), $\vee$ ('or'), and $\Rightarrow$ ('implies')  to simpler formulas. The simplest formulas are called atomic formulas, and usually take the form of an equation $s = t$ between two terms (and underneath there are rules for term formation as well), or something like $R(a_1, \ldots, a_n)$ where $R$ stands for some basic relation (between terms $a_1, \ldots, a_n$) belonging to whatever language one is working with. A standard list of *propositional* operations would be 

* $\wedge, \vee, \Rightarrow$ (binary operations), $\neg$ ('not', an unary operator), and $\top, \bot$ ('true' and 'false', basic logical constants or nullary operators). 

Missing from propositional logic *per se* are quantifiers such as $\exists$ and $\forall$, which properly speaking belong to [[predicate logic]]. (One way of thinking about propositional logic is that it treats formulas as assertions "all of the same type", whereas quantifiers allow one to shift between classes of assertions of one type to assertions of another type.) 

As we said, there are also rules of inference. There are various styles in which these are presented, such as [[natural deduction]] or [[sequent calculus]]. But a simple example might look like this: 

$$\frac{P \wedge Q}{P}$$ 

("from $P \wedge Q$ we may infer $P$"). This might also be written $P \wedge Q \vdash P$ ("pronounced $P \wedge Q$ entails $P$"), thought of as asserting a relation between propositions called entailment. Two of the universal rules of propositional logic (whether classical or intuitionistic or quantum or whatever) is that the entailment relation should be [[reflexive relation|reflexive]] and [[transitive relation|transitive]]: the rules of inference allow an entailment $P \vdash P$ for any formula $P$, and if they allow entailments $A \vdash B$ and $B \vdash C$, then they allow $A \vdash C$. 

Thus, in a propositional logic, formulas together with the entailment relation that is provided for by the rules of inference form a [[preorder]]. Sometimes one goes a little further: in situations where one can derive $A \vdash B$ and $B \vdash A$, one says that $A$ and $B$ are provably equivalent (often abbreviated as $A \equiv B$), and one may pass to the [[poset]] of provable equivalence classes (the usual way in which a poset is associated with a preorder). 

One knows that one is in the realm of *classical* propositional logic if the poset of provable equivalence classes is a [[Boolean algebra]], in which $\wedge$ induces the meet operation and $\vee$ the join operation. Here the rules of inference allow bi-entailments such as 

$$A \Rightarrow B \equiv \neg A \vee B$$ 

and in fact the different types of propositional logic are usually conveniently described by specifying what type of algebraic structure we get on the poset of provable equivalence classes. For example, in [[intuitionistic logic]] this poset forms a [[Heyting algebra]]. 
