pages/8972.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

The book

* [[Robert Harper]]

  _Practical Foundations for Programming Languages, second edition_, Cambridge University Press (2016), ([webpage](http://www.cambridge.org/us/academic/subjects/computer-science/programming-languages-and-applied-logic/practical-foundations-programming-languages-2nd-edition?format=HB))

lays the foundations of the theory of [[programming languages]] in terms of [[type theory]].

The first edition (2012) is available as a [pdf](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~rwh/plbook/book.pdf). A description of the changes is [here](https://existentialtype.wordpress.com/2016/04/11/practical-foundations-of-programming-languages-second-edition/).



## Related entries

* [[Practical Foundations of Mathematics]]


category: reference, applications

[[!redirects Practical Foundations for Programming Languages]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 107530 Revision date: 2016-04-14 09:00:37 Page name: Practical Foundations for Programming Languages Author: Nikolaj Kuntner IP address: 217.10.52.10

pages/8972.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Type theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include type theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

The book

* [[Robert Harper]]

  _Practical Foundations for Programming Languages, second edition_, Cambridge University Press (2016), ([webpage](http://www.cambridge.org/us/academic/subjects/computer-science/programming-languages-and-applied-logic/practical-foundations-programming-languages-2nd-edition?format=HB))

lays the foundations of the theory of [[programming languages]] in terms of [[type theory]].
In over 500 pages, the author formally specifies and step-by-step extends established type systems and reasons about type savefty and operational semantics (not so much dependent types and categorical semantics). The book also contains a discussion of logic in type theory and features of variants of the Algol programming language, in particular.

The first edition (2012) is available as a [pdf](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~rwh/plbook/book.pdf). A description of the changes is [here](https://existentialtype.wordpress.com/2016/04/11/practical-foundations-of-programming-languages-second-edition/).



## Related entries

* [[Practical Foundations of Mathematics]]


category: reference, applications

[[!redirects Practical Foundations for Programming Languages]]
