pages/8994.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A **linearly distributive category** is a [[category]] with two [[monoidal structures]] $\otimes$ and $\invamp$ that "distribute" in the sense that there is a map (not necessarily invertible)

$$
   \delta \colon A \otimes (B \parr C) \longrightarrow (A \otimes B) \parr C
$$

Linearly distributive categories are the "representable" form of [[polycategories]], and they are also what "remains" of a [[star-autonomous category]] when the involution is forgotten but the dual tensor $A\invamp B \coloneqq (A^* \otimes B^*)^*$ is remembered.

## Definition

A **linearly distributive category** (also called a **weakly distributive category**) is a [[monoidal category]] in two ways, with monoidal structures $(\otimes, I)$ and $(\bullet, J)$ equipped with extra associator natural transformations

\[ \delta^L:A\otimes (B\bullet C) \to (A \otimes B) \bullet C \]

\[ \delta^R:(A\bullet B) \otimes C \to A \bullet (B \otimes C) \]

and the obvious six pentagon equations and four triangle equations that make the monoidal structures work together nicely.

These extra associators are sometimes called "distributors", and should not be confused with [[profunctors]].  The term is a pun on the distributivity of multiplication over addition, but "linearized" so that each variable only appears once in the result.

**Warning:** a linearly distributive category *cannot* be a [[distributive category]], unless it is a partial order.

## Related structures

### Star-autonomous category

Any [[star-autonomous category]] has an underlying linearly distributive category where we define $A\bullet B \coloneqq (A^* \otimes B^*)^*$, or equivalently $A\bullet B \coloneqq A^* \multimap B$, where $\multimap$ is the internal-hom.  The left distributor, for instance, is obtained as follows:
$$\array{\arrayopts{\rowlines{solid}}
\array{\arrayopts{\rowlines{solid}}
(A\otimes B)^* \longrightarrow (A\otimes B)^* \\
A \otimes (A\otimes B)^* \longrightarrow B^*} \qquad
\array{\arrayopts{\rowlines{solid}}
B^* \multimap C \longrightarrow B^* \multimap C\\
B^* \otimes (B^* \multimap C) \longrightarrow C\\
B^* \longrightarrow (B^* \multimap C) \multimap C} \\
A \otimes (A\otimes B)^* \longrightarrow (B^* \multimap C) \multimap C \\
A\otimes (B^*\multimap C) \longrightarrow (A \otimes B)^* \multimap C
}$$
Conversely, a linearly distributive category having a "negation" is $\ast$-autonomous; see ([Cockett-Seely 97](#CockettSeely97)).

### Polycategories

Any linearly distributive category has an underlying [[polycategory]] where we define $Hom(A_1,\dots,A_n; B_1,\dots,B_m)$ to be $Hom(A_1\otimes \cdots \otimes A_n; B_1 \bullet \cdots \bullet B_m)$.
The polycategorical compositions are obtained using the distributors.  For instance, we should be able to compose $f:(A,B) \to (C,D,E)$ with $g:(F,D,G) \to H$ to get $g\circ f : (F,A,B,G) \to (C,H,E)$; in a linearly distributive category this is the composite
$$\begin{aligned}
  F\otimes (A\otimes B)\otimes G
  &\xrightarrow{1_F\otimes f\otimes 1_G} F\otimes (C\bullet D\bullet E)\otimes G\\
  &\xrightarrow{\delta} ((F\otimes (C\bullet D)) \bullet E)\otimes G\\
  &\xrightarrow{\delta} ((C\bullet (F\otimes D)) \bullet E)\otimes G\\
  &\xrightarrow{\cong} ((C\bullet E) \bullet (F\otimes D))\otimes G\\
  &\xrightarrow{\delta} (C\bullet E) \bullet ((F\otimes D)\otimes G)\\
  &\xrightarrow{1_{C\bullet E}\bullet g} (C\bullet E) \bullet H\\
  &\xrightarrow{\cong} C\bullet H\bullet E
\end{aligned}$$
Conversely, a polycategory that is suitably "representable" yields a linearly distributive category; see ([Cockett-Seely 97](#CockettSeely97)).

## History

The concept was originally called a _weakly distributive category_  and was introduced by [[Robin Cockett]] and [[Robert Seely]] in 1991 at the Durham conference on applications of categories ([Cockett-Seely 97](#CockettSeely97)).  Subsequently, in recognition of their fundamental role in the [[categorical semantics]] for the [[proof theory]] of [[linear logic]], and the fact that they are not a "weakening" of [[distributive categories]] in any standard sense, they were renamed to _linearly distributive categories_.

A key feature of linearly distributive categories is the existence of [[morphisms]] of the form

$$
   \delta \colon A \otimes (B \parr C) \longrightarrow (A \otimes B) \parr C
$$

which exhibit linear [[distributivity]].  The importance of this map had previously  been overlooked in the [[linear logic]] community due to the (continuing) tendency to write [[sequents]]  in a one-sided manner.  However, the importance of the map was gradually being realized:  for example [[Valeria de Paiva]] and [[Martin Hyland]] had independently pointed out the significance of the map.

Linearly distributive categories were introduced to modularize the [[proof theory]] of [[linear logic]] and to allow a more systematic approach to the then still unsolved [[coherence]] problems associated with the units in linear logic.  This program of work culminated in a solution which was published in ([BCST 1996](#BCST))

These techniques also solved a classical open problem in [[closed monoidal categories]] concerning the behaviour of the triple dual.  [[Todd Trimble]], who was completing his PhD. at the time, provided a vital insight to the group on how this problem could be solved and this unlocked the solution to the general problem.

Linearly distributive categories are to [[polycategories]] as [[monoidal categories]] are to [[multicategories]].  Namely, when one represents "the commas" of a polycategory one obtains a linearly distributive category.  Crucially, the key coherence issues of (the multiplicative fragment of) linear logic concerning the units is already present at the linearly distributive level -- but it is no longer cluttered by the other features of linear logic.  Thus, this provided a clean substrate from which to study and isolate this coherence problem.

Contrary to the general direction of work in coherence (and, indeed, in the linear logic community) the solution to the problem (given in ([BCST 1996](#BCST))) involved an expansion reduction rewriting system modulo equations.   At that time, the prevailing  proof theoretic strategy for solving coherence problems was simply to [[cut elimination|cut-eliminate]]: usually this suffices to leave proofs in a normal form.  However, this system was notable as this strategy clearly failed: it was necessary to leave some equations in the system.  These equations, of course, involved the possible "rewiring"s of the units.  

At that time this was generally thought to be a rather unsatisfactory and unnecessarily technical solution especially when compared to the normal forms to which the community was accustomed.    However, subsequently, in 2014, Willem Heijltjes and Robin Houston ([HH2014](#HH)) showed that equality of morphism is a [[PSPACE]] complete problem.  This essentially implies that there is no practical way round this problem beyond a search of the rewiring equivalence class.

Linearly distributive categories have now been used as the substrate for a number of systems. 

## Related pages

* [[distributive law]]

* [[distributivity for monoidal structures]]

  * [[distributive monoidal category]]

  * [[bipermutative category]]

  * [[linearly distributive category]]

  * [[rig category]]

* [[polycategory]], [[star-autonomous category]]

## References

* {#CockettSeely97} [[Robin Cockett]], [[Robert Seely]],  _Weakly Distributive Categories_, _Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra_, 114(1997)2, pp 133-173 ([ps.gz](http://www.math.mcgill.ca/rags/linear/wdc.ps.gz))

* [[Paul-André Melliès]], [Categorical Semantics of Linear Logic](http://www.pps.univ-paris-diderot.fr/~mellies/papers/panorama.pdf), published in [[Pierre-Louis Curien]], Hugo Herbelin, Jean-Louis Krivine, Paul-André Melliès. _Interactive models of computation and program behaviour_, Panoramas et Synthèses 27, Société Mathématique de France, 2009. 

* [[Richard Blute|R. Blute]], [[Robin Cockett|J.R.B. Cockett]], [[Robert Seely|R.A.G. Seely]], [[Todd Trimble|T. Trimble]], _Natural deduction and coherence for weakly distributive categories_, J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 113 (1996), pp. 229–296. ([web](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/002240499500159X)) 
 {#BCST} 

* Willem Heijltjes, [[Robin Houston]], _No proof nets for MLL with units: proof equivalence in MLL is PSPACE-complete_, CSL-LICS '14 Proceedings of the Joint Meeting of the Twenty-Third EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL) and the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), Article No. 50. ([web](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2603126)) 
 {#HH} 

[[!redirects weakly distributive category]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 108716 Revision date: 2016-05-13 17:42:07 Page name: linearly distributive category Author: Mike Shulman IP address: 76.167.222.204

pages/8994.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Monoidal categories
+--{: .hide}
[[!include monoidal categories - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A **linearly distributive category** is a [[category]] with two [[monoidal structures]] $\otimes$ and $\invamp$ that "distribute" in the sense that there is a map (not necessarily invertible)

$$
   \delta \colon A \otimes (B \parr C) \longrightarrow (A \otimes B) \parr C
$$

Linearly distributive categories are the "representable" form of [[polycategories]], and they are also what "remains" of a [[star-autonomous category]] when the involution is forgotten but the dual tensor $A\invamp B \coloneqq (A^* \otimes B^*)^*$ is remembered.

## Definition

A **linearly distributive category** (also called a **weakly distributive category**) is a [[monoidal category]] in two ways, with monoidal structures $(\otimes, I)$ and $(\bullet, J)$ equipped with extra associator natural transformations

\[ \delta^L:A\otimes (B\bullet C) \to (A \otimes B) \bullet C \]

\[ \delta^R:(A\bullet B) \otimes C \to A \bullet (B \otimes C) \]

and the obvious six pentagon equations and four triangle equations that make the monoidal structures work together nicely.

These extra associators are sometimes called "distributors", and should not be confused with [[profunctors]].  The term is a pun on the distributivity of multiplication over addition, but "linearized" so that each variable only appears once in the result.

**Warning:** a linearly distributive category *cannot* be a [[distributive category]], unless it is a partial order.

## Related structures

### Star-autonomous category

Any [[star-autonomous category]] has an underlying linearly distributive category where we define $A\bullet B \coloneqq (A^* \otimes B^*)^*$, or equivalently $A\bullet B \coloneqq A^* \multimap B$, where $\multimap$ is the internal-hom.  The left distributor, for instance, is obtained as follows:
$$\array{\arrayopts{\rowlines{solid}}
\array{\arrayopts{\rowlines{solid}}
(A\otimes B)^* \longrightarrow (A\otimes B)^* \\
A \otimes (A\otimes B)^* \longrightarrow B^*} \qquad
\array{\arrayopts{\rowlines{solid}}
B^* \multimap C \longrightarrow B^* \multimap C\\
B^* \otimes (B^* \multimap C) \longrightarrow C\\
B^* \longrightarrow (B^* \multimap C) \multimap C} \\
A \otimes (A\otimes B)^* \longrightarrow (B^* \multimap C) \multimap C \\
A\otimes (B^*\multimap C) \longrightarrow (A \otimes B)^* \multimap C
}$$
Conversely, a linearly distributive category having a "negation" is $\ast$-autonomous; see ([Cockett-Seely 97](#CockettSeely97)).

### Polycategories

Any linearly distributive category has an underlying [[polycategory]] where we define $Hom(A_1,\dots,A_n; B_1,\dots,B_m)$ to be $Hom(A_1\otimes \cdots \otimes A_n; B_1 \bullet \cdots \bullet B_m)$.
The polycategorical compositions are obtained using the distributors.  For instance, we should be able to compose $f:(A,B) \to (C,D,E)$ with $g:(F,D,G) \to H$ to get $g\circ f : (F,A,B,G) \to (C,H,E)$; in a linearly distributive category this is the composite
$$\begin{aligned}
  F\otimes (A\otimes B)\otimes G
  &\xrightarrow{1_F\otimes f\otimes 1_G} F\otimes (C\bullet D\bullet E)\otimes G\\
  &\xrightarrow{\delta} ((F\otimes (C\bullet D)) \bullet E)\otimes G\\
  &\xrightarrow{\delta} ((C\bullet (F\otimes D)) \bullet E)\otimes G\\
  &\xrightarrow{\cong} ((C\bullet E) \bullet (F\otimes D))\otimes G\\
  &\xrightarrow{\delta} (C\bullet E) \bullet ((F\otimes D)\otimes G)\\
  &\xrightarrow{1_{C\bullet E}\bullet g} (C\bullet E) \bullet H\\
  &\xrightarrow{\cong} C\bullet H\bullet E
\end{aligned}$$
Conversely, a polycategory that is suitably "representable" yields a linearly distributive category; see ([Cockett-Seely 97](#CockettSeely97)).

### Symmetric monoidal categories

Any [[symmetric monoidal category]] becomes a linearly distributive category in which both monoidal structures are the same; all the required structure and coherence conditions follow straight from coherence for symmetric monoidal categories.  Note that such examples are almost never [[star-autonomous]].

## History

The concept was originally called a _weakly distributive category_  and was introduced by [[Robin Cockett]] and [[Robert Seely]] in 1991 at the Durham conference on applications of categories ([Cockett-Seely 97](#CockettSeely97)).  Subsequently, in recognition of their fundamental role in the [[categorical semantics]] for the [[proof theory]] of [[linear logic]], and the fact that they are not a "weakening" of [[distributive categories]] in any standard sense, they were renamed to _linearly distributive categories_.

A key feature of linearly distributive categories is the existence of [[morphisms]] of the form

$$
   \delta \colon A \otimes (B \parr C) \longrightarrow (A \otimes B) \parr C
$$

which exhibit linear [[distributivity]].  The importance of this map had previously  been overlooked in the [[linear logic]] community due to the (continuing) tendency to write [[sequents]]  in a one-sided manner.  However, the importance of the map was gradually being realized:  for example [[Valeria de Paiva]] and [[Martin Hyland]] had independently pointed out the significance of the map.

Linearly distributive categories were introduced to modularize the [[proof theory]] of [[linear logic]] and to allow a more systematic approach to the then still unsolved [[coherence]] problems associated with the units in linear logic.  This program of work culminated in a solution which was published in ([BCST 1996](#BCST))

These techniques also solved a classical open problem in [[closed monoidal categories]] concerning the behaviour of the triple dual.  [[Todd Trimble]], who was completing his PhD. at the time, provided a vital insight to the group on how this problem could be solved and this unlocked the solution to the general problem.

Linearly distributive categories are to [[polycategories]] as [[monoidal categories]] are to [[multicategories]].  Namely, when one represents "the commas" of a polycategory one obtains a linearly distributive category.  Crucially, the key coherence issues of (the multiplicative fragment of) linear logic concerning the units is already present at the linearly distributive level -- but it is no longer cluttered by the other features of linear logic.  Thus, this provided a clean substrate from which to study and isolate this coherence problem.

Contrary to the general direction of work in coherence (and, indeed, in the linear logic community) the solution to the problem (given in ([BCST 1996](#BCST))) involved an expansion reduction rewriting system modulo equations.   At that time, the prevailing  proof theoretic strategy for solving coherence problems was simply to [[cut elimination|cut-eliminate]]: usually this suffices to leave proofs in a normal form.  However, this system was notable as this strategy clearly failed: it was necessary to leave some equations in the system.  These equations, of course, involved the possible "rewiring"s of the units.  

At that time this was generally thought to be a rather unsatisfactory and unnecessarily technical solution especially when compared to the normal forms to which the community was accustomed.    However, subsequently, in 2014, Willem Heijltjes and Robin Houston ([HH2014](#HH)) showed that equality of morphism is a [[PSPACE]] complete problem.  This essentially implies that there is no practical way round this problem beyond a search of the rewiring equivalence class.

Linearly distributive categories have now been used as the substrate for a number of systems. 

## Related pages

* [[distributive law]]

* [[distributivity for monoidal structures]]

  * [[distributive monoidal category]]

  * [[bipermutative category]]

  * [[linearly distributive category]]

  * [[rig category]]

* [[polycategory]], [[star-autonomous category]]

## References

* {#CockettSeely97} [[Robin Cockett]], [[Robert Seely]],  _Weakly Distributive Categories_, _Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra_, 114(1997)2, pp 133-173 ([ps.gz](http://www.math.mcgill.ca/rags/linear/wdc.ps.gz))

* [[Paul-André Melliès]], [Categorical Semantics of Linear Logic](http://www.pps.univ-paris-diderot.fr/~mellies/papers/panorama.pdf), published in [[Pierre-Louis Curien]], Hugo Herbelin, Jean-Louis Krivine, Paul-André Melliès. _Interactive models of computation and program behaviour_, Panoramas et Synthèses 27, Société Mathématique de France, 2009. 

* [[Richard Blute|R. Blute]], [[Robin Cockett|J.R.B. Cockett]], [[Robert Seely|R.A.G. Seely]], [[Todd Trimble|T. Trimble]], _Natural deduction and coherence for weakly distributive categories_, J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 113 (1996), pp. 229–296. ([web](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/002240499500159X)) 
 {#BCST} 

* Willem Heijltjes, [[Robin Houston]], _No proof nets for MLL with units: proof equivalence in MLL is PSPACE-complete_, CSL-LICS '14 Proceedings of the Joint Meeting of the Twenty-Third EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL) and the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), Article No. 50. ([web](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2603126)) 
 {#HH} 

[[!redirects weakly distributive category]]
