
# Partial functions
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A _partial function_ $f: A \to B$ is like a [[function]] from $A$ to $B$ except that $f(x)$ may not be defined for every element $x$ of $A$.  (Compare a [[multi-valued function]], where $f(x)$ may have several possible values.)

In some fields (including secondary-school mathematics even today), functions are often considered to be partial by default, requiring one to specify a _total_ function otherwise.  As category-theoretic and type-theoretic formalisation spreads, this is difficult to treat as the basic concept, and the most modern idea is that a function must be total.  If you want partial functions, then you can get them in terms of total functions as below.


## Definitions

Given [[set]]s $A$ and $B$, a __partial function__ $f$ from a $A$ to $B$ consists a [[subset]] $D$ of $A$ and a (total) function from $D$ to $B$.  In more detail, this is a [[span]]
$$ \array {
  &                & D \\
  & \swarrow_\iota &   & \searrow^f \\
A &                &   &            & B \\
} $$
of total functions, where $\iota: D \to A$ is an [[injection]].  (This condition can be dropped to define a partial [[multi-valued function]], which is simply a span.)

$A$ and $B$ are called the _[[source]]_ and _[[target]]_ of $f$ as usual; then $D$ is the __domain__ of $f$ and $\iota: D \to A $ is the __inclusion__ of the domain into the source.  By abuse of notation, the partial function $f$ is conflated with the (total) function $f: D \to B$.

Notice that the induced function $D \to A \times B$ is an [[injection]], so a partial function is the same as a [[functional relation]] seen from a different point of view.

We consider two partial functions (with the same given source and target) to be __equal__ if there is a [[bijection]] between their domains that makes the obvious diagrams commute.  You can get this automatically in a traditional set theory by requiring $D$ to be literally a [[subset]] of $A$ (with $\iota$ the inclusion map).


## Examples

In secondary-school mathematics, one often makes functions partial by fiat, just to see if students can calculate the domains of composite functions and the like.  This is not (only) busywork, as in applications one often has a function given by a formula that is really valid only on a certain domain.  However, in more sophisticated analyses (such as those that Lawvere and his followers propose for physics and synthetic geometry), these domains and the total functions on them become the primary objects of study, with the partial functions being secondary (as $\iota$ is seen as merely a way to place _coordinates_ on $D$).

In analysis, one often considers partial functions whose domains are required to be intervals in the real line, regions of the complex plane, or dense subsets of a [[Banach space]].

+-- {: .query}
[[Ronnie Brown|Ronnie]] There is an interesting debate possible here! 

On the basis of my teaching of first year analysis and calculus since 1959, I found the most convenient  idea is that of a function $f: R \to R$ being a _partial function_ with a domain  which can be calculated from a formula for the function, and may be empty. Then one finds that the inverse of an injective function $R \to R$ is also a function $R \to R$. A first order differential equation has a solution which is a partial function. What seems to be lacking is the functional analysis of such solutions. For example $dy/dx=1/ (\lambda +x)$ has a solution whose domain varies with $\lambda$ and ought to (and can be made to) vary continuously, including its open domain! 

The work of Charles Ehresmann is full of partial functions, derived from his strong interest in analysis and differential geometry, and local-to-global problems. So he developed for example the theory of pseudogroups, and contributed to inverse semigroups. 

A possible reason for the difficulties some have of accepting groupoids rather than groups is that groupoids have a partial composition, which is of course very intuitive when one thinks of composing journeys.  

In higher dimensional algebra one is dealing with algebraic structures whose domains are defined by geometric conditions. 

Of course category theory initially derived from algebra and algebraic topology, where partial functions are unusual. However they are necessary in dealing with fibred exponential laws, i.e. exponential laws in a slice category of $Top$, and their applications. See papers of Peter Booth. 

_Toby_:  For first-year calculus, I agree with you, except that you ought to be able to restrict the definition to an interval (or a union of intervals) by fiat.  (Actually, you can get this from formulas by adding appropriate terms of the form $\sqrt {x-a} - \sqrt{x-a}$, $\log(a-x) - \log(a-x)$, etc, but that\'s silly.)  So calculus is about (certain) functions to $\mathbf{R}$ from unions of intervals on $\mathbf{R}$.  Of course, this doesn\'t include *all* partial functions on $\mathbf{R}$, but then it doesn\'t even include all such *total* functions, so maybe the restriction on allowed domains doesn\'t matter.

But if you disagree that 'in more sophisticated analyses [...], these domains and the total functions on them become the primary objects of study', then feel free to change the text (say to 'in other analyses [...]'; I don\'t intend to defend the claim that this is really the right way to do things.
=--

In a [[field]], the multiplicative [[inverse]] is a partial function whose domain is the set of non-zero elements of the field.


## The category of sets and partial functions

The [[category]] $Set_part$ of sets and partial functions between them is important for understanding computation.  However, one often replaces this with an [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] category of sets and total functions.

Specifically, replace each set $S$ with the set $S_\bot$ of all [[subset]]s of $S$ with at most one element.  In this context, we identify an element $x$ of $S$ with the subset $\{x\}$ and write the [[empty set|empty]] subset as $\bot$.  Then a partial functon $S \to T$ becomes a total function $S_\bot \to T_\bot$ such that [[inhabited set|inhabited]] subsets of $T$ are assigned only to inhabited subsets of $S$.  Then $Set_part$ is equivalent to the category $Set_\bot$ of such sets and functions.

Classically, $S_\bot \cong S \amalg \{\bot\}$, although this is not true [[constructive mathematics|constructively]].  Then the category $Set_part$ becomes equivalent to the category $Set_*$ of [[pointed set]]s and total point-preserving functions.  Traditionally, one uses the notation of $Set_\bot$ but (unless one is a constructivist) thinks of this as simply different notation for $Set_*$.

For a more sophisticated analysis of computation, $Set_\bot$ can be replaced with a suitable category of domains, such as [[direction|directed]] [[complete lattice|complete]] [[partial order|partially ordered]] sets (DCPOs).  The requirement that $\bot$ be preserved can then be removed to model lazy computation, but now we are hardly talking about partial functions anymore.

## Partial maps 

If $C$ is a category with [[pullbacks]], then a **partial map** from $a$ to $b$ may be defined to be a [[span]] 

$$\array{
 & & D & & \\
 & ^\mathllap{i} \swarrow & & \searrow^\mathrlap{f} & \\
A & & & & B
}$$ 
 
where $i$ is [[monomorphism|monic]]. Such spans are closed under span composition, and as a locally full subbicategory of $Span(C)$, the bicategory of partial maps in $C$ is locally preordered. In more down-to-earth terms, if $(i, f)$ and $(i', f')$ are partial maps from $a$ to $b$, we have $(i, f) \leq (i', f')$ if there exists (necessarily monic) $j$ such that $i = i' \circ j$ and $f = f' \circ j$. 

Abstract bicategories of partial maps, parallel to [[bicategory of relations|bicategories of relations]], were introduced by [Carboni](#Carb). 


## References 

* [[Aurelio Carboni]], Bicategories of partial maps, Cahiers de Topologie et Géométrie Différentielle Catégoriques, 28 no. 2 (1987), p. 111-126 ([web](http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CTGDC_1987__28_2_111_0))
{#Carb} 


[[!redirects partial function]]
[[!redirects partial functions]]
[[!redirects partially defined function]]
[[!redirects partially defined functions]]
[[!redirects partially-defined function]]
[[!redirects partially-defined functions]]

[[!redirects partial map]]
[[!redirects partial maps]]

[[!redirects partial morphism]]
[[!redirects partial morphisms]]
