
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Fields and quanta
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include fields and quanta - table]]
=--
=--
=--

# Contents
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

The [[standard model of particle physics]] is a [[Yang-Mills theory|Yang-Mills]] [[gauge theory]] with [[gauge group]] (a [[discrete group|discrete]] [[quotient]] of) $SU(3) \times SU(2) \times U(1)$. Here the first factor is the gauge group of [[QCD]] while the $(SU(2) \times U(1))$-[[gauge field]] is that transmitting what is called the **electroweak force**. 

The name is due to the fact that this gauge field unifies the [[electromagnetic field]] and that transmitting the [[weak nuclear force]]: the [[Higgs mechanism]] induces a [[spontaneous symmetry breaking]] of the electroweak field to these two fields. See at _[[electroweak symmetry breaking]]_.


## Related concepts

* [[QED]], [[QCD]]

* [[standard model of particle physics]]

## References

### General

The electroweak interaction was introduced in

* [[Sheldon Glashow]], _The renormalizability of vector meson interactions_, Nucl. Phys. 10, 107. (1959)

* [[Abdus Salam]], [[John Clive Ward]], _Weak and electromagnetic interactions_, Nuovo Cimento. 11 (4): 568&#8211;577. (1959)

The electroweak symmetry breaking via the [[Higgs mechanism]] is due to

* {#Weinberg67} [[Steven  Weinberg]], _A model of Leptons_, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1264, 1967 ([doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.19.1264](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.19.1264))

The history of [Weinberg 67](#Weinberg67) is recounted in

* Frank Close, _[Birth of a Symmetry](http://cerncourier.com/cws/article/cern/70137)_, Cern Courier, Oct 13 2017

Textbook account:

* [[Robert E. Marshak]], Chapter 6 of: *Conceptual Foundations of Modern Particle Physics*, World Scientific 1993 ([doi:10.1142/1767](https://doi.org/10.1142/1767))


See also

* [[Michael Peskin]], _Precision Theory of Electroweak Interactions_ ([arXiv:2003.05433](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.05433))

* Wikipedia, _[Electroweak interaction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electroweak_interaction)_


Discussion in [[causal perturbation theory]] is in

* Andreas Aste, [[Michael Dütsch]], [[Günter Scharf]], _Perturbative gauge invariance: electroweak theory II_, Annalen Phys.8:389-404,1999 ([arXiv:hep-th/9702053](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9702053))

* {#Scharf01} [[Günter Scharf]], chapter 4 of _[[Quantum Gauge Theories -- A True Ghost Story]]_, Wiley 2001


### In relation to flavour anomalies

In relation to [[flavour anomalies]]:

* Lina Alasfar, Aleksandr Azatov, Jorge de Blas, Ayan Paul, Mauro Valli, _B anomalies under the lens of electroweak precision_ ([arXiv:2007.04400](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.04400))


[[!redirects electroweak]]
[[!redirects electroweak field]]
[[!redirects electroweak fields]]
[[!redirects electroweak force]]
[[!redirects electroweak forces]]
[[!redirects electroweak theory]]
[[!redirects electroweak theories]]
[[!redirects electroweak model]]
[[!redirects electroweak models]]

[[!redirects EW]]
