
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Fields and quanta
+--{: .hide}
[[!include fields and quanta - table]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

_Quarks_ are one of the fundamental [[particles]]/[[matter]] [[field (physics)|fields]] in the [[standard model of particle physics]]. Quarks couple to the [[Yang-Mills theory]] given by [[QCD]].

At room-[[temperature]] quarks always form [[bound states]] to [[hadrons]]. This phenomenon of _[[confinement]]_ is quantitatively well-reproduced by [[lattice QCD]] computations (see [Fodor-Hoelbling 12](#FodorHoelbling12)) and qualitatively well reproduced by conceptual arguments such as the [[AdS/QCD correspondence]], but a full analytic [[proof]] of confinement from a rigorous [[AQFT]]-like foundation of [[QCD]] remains open, see the _[[mass gap problem]]_.

However, at high [[temperature]] [[QCD]] goes through a _deconfinement_ [[phase transition]] and enters another [[phase of matter]] known as the [[quark-gluon plasma]]. As the name suggests, here quarks and [[gluons]] are free.



## Related concepts

* [[quark-gluon plasma]]

* [[generation of fermions]]

* [[meson]], [[hadron]]

* [[B meson]]

* [[squark]]



## References

### General

* Jean-Marc Richard, _An introduction to the quark model_ ([arXiv:1205.4326](https://arxiv.org/abs/1205.4326))

Textbooks:

* {#HalzenMartin84} [[Francis Halzen]], [[Alan Martin]], _Quarks and Leptons: An Introductory Course in Modern Particle Physics_, Wiley 1984 ([pdf](http://ajbell.web.cern.ch/ajbell/Documents/eBooks/Quarks%20&%20Leptons.pdf))

### History

* [[George Zweig]], _Origins of the quark model_, 1980 ([pdf](https://authors.library.caltech.edu/18969/1/Origins_of_the_Quark_Model_Final_Zweig%5B1%5D.pdf), [[ZweigQuarkModel1980.pdf:file]])

### Ab-initio lattice computation
 {#ReferencesAbInitioLatticeComputation}

Due to [[confinement]], before the [[quark-gluon plasma]] was seen in [[experiment]] it was a logical possibility that the quark-model of [[QCD]] is not actually correct. But more recend ab-initio computation in [[lattice QCD]] show that starting with the quark model, at least the light [[hadron]] [[bound states]] observes in [[experiment]] are reproduced by these ab-initio computations. This is discussed in the following references, see the good review [Fodor-Hoelbling 12](#FodorHoelbling12)

* S. Durr, Z. Fodor, J. Frison, C. Hoelbling, R. Hoffmann, S.D. Katz, S. Krieg, T. Kurth, L. Lellouch, T. Lippert, K.K. Szabo, G. Vulvert,

  _Ab-initio Determination of Light Hadron Masses_,

  Science 322:1224-1227,2008 ([arXiv:0906.3599](https://arxiv.org/abs/0906.3599))

* {#FodorHoelbling12} Zoltan Fodor, Christian Hoelbling, _Light Hadron Masses from Lattice QCD_, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 449, ([arXiv:1203.4789](https://arxiv.org/abs/1203.4789))

* S. Aoki et. al. _Review of lattice results concerning low-energy particle physics_ ([arXiv:1607.00299](https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.00299))

See also 

* Wikipedia, _[Quark](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quark)_

[[!redirects quarks]]
