
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Complex geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include complex geometry - contents]]
=--
#### Manifolds and cobordisms
+--{: .hide}
[[!include manifolds and cobordisms - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

A _Stein manifold_ is a [[complex manifold]] satisfying some niceness condition generalizing the concept of a [[domain of holomorphy]]. 


## Definition

### Stein manifold

The original definition ([Stein 51](#Stein51)) says that
a _Stein manifold_  $\Sigma$ is a [[complex manifold]] which is a "holomorphically convex" and "holomorphically separable" subset of a $\mathbb{C}^n$.

This is equivalent to ([[Reinhold Remmert]], Narasimhan, Bishop) saying that $\Sigma$ admits a [[proper morphism|proper]] [[holomorphic function|holomorphic]]  [[immersion]] $\Sigma \hookrightarrow\mathbb{C}^n$.

### Stein spaces

A [[complex analytic space]] is a _Stein space_ precisely if its [[reduction modality|reduction]] is a [[Stein manifold]].

## Examples

Every [[domain of holomorphy]] in some $\mathbb{C}^n$ is a Stein manifold.

Every closed [[submanifold|sub-]][[complex manifold]] of a Stein manifold is itself Stein.

Every non-[[compact topological space|compact]] [[Riemann surface]] is a Stein manifold (by Behnke-Stein).




## Properties

### Basic properties

A Stein manifold is necessarily a non-[[compact topological space]].


### Oka-Grauert principle

The _[[Oka-Grauert principle]] states that for any [[Stein manifold]] $X$ the holomorphic and the topological classification of [[complex vector bundles]] on $X$ coincide. The original reference is ([Grauert 58](#Grauert)).

### Cartan Theorem B

* [[Cartan theorem B]]

## References

The original article is 

* {#Stein51} [[Karl Stein]],  _Analytische Funktionen mehrerer komplexer Veränderlichen zu vorgegebenen Periodizitätsmoduln und das zweite Cousinsche Problem_, Math. Ann. (in German) 123: 201–222, (1951) MR 0043219

The theory was the developed in

* {#Grauert58} [[Hans Grauert]], _Analytische Faserungen über holomorph-vollständigen Räumen_, Math. Ann. __135__, 263–-273 (1958) [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01351803)


Reviews include

* Wikipedia, _[Stein manifold](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stein_manifold)_

* [[eom]], _[Stein space](http://www.encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php/Stein_space)_

* {#GrauertRemmert04} [[Hans Grauert]], [[Reinhold Remmert]], _Theory of Stein Spaces_, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2004.

As a [[site]] for [[higher complex analytic geometry]] the category of Stein manifolds appears in 

* [[Jacob Lurie]], section 4.4. of _[[Structured Spaces]]_

[[!redirects Stein manifolds]]

[[!redirects Stein space]]
[[!redirects Stein spaces]]

[[!redirects Stein domain]]
[[!redirects Stein domains]]