
> This entry discusses topological spaces that are also called _Alexandroff spaces_ or (maybe more commonly) _Alexandrov spaces_ after [[Paul Alexandrov]]. This is unrelated to the notion of [[Alexandrov space (in differential geometry)]] named after [[Alexander Alexandrov]].

***

# Specialisation topology
* table of contents
{: toc}


## Idea

The __specialisation topology__, also called the __Alexandrov topology__, is a natural structure of a [[topological space]] induced on the underlying [[set]] of a  [[preordered set]].

This is similar to the [[Scott topology]], which is however coarser.


## Definition


+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

Let $P$ be a [[preordered set]].

Declare subset $A$ of $P$ to be an _[[open subset]]_ if it is upwards-closed.  That is, if $x \leq y$ and $x \in A$, then $y \in A$.  

This defines a [[topology]] on $P$, called the **specialization topology** or **Alexandrov topology**.

=--


+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

One may also use the convention that the open sets are the downwards-closed subsets; this is the specialisation topology on the [[opposite category|opposite]] $P^\op$.

=--

## Examples

* [[Sierpinski space]] is the poset of [[truth values]] with the specialisation topology.


## Properties

### General


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Every [[finite set|finite]] [[topological space]] is an Alexandrov space.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

A [[preorder]] $P$ is a [[partial order|poset]] if and only if its specialisation topology is $T_0$.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

A [[function]] between preorders is order-preserving if and only if it is a [[continuous map]] with respect to the specialisation topology.  

=--

### Alexandrov topological spaces

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

An **Alexandrov space** is a [[topological space]] for which arbitrary (as opposed to just finite) [[intersection]]s of [[open subsets]] are still open.

Write 

$$
  AlexTop \hookrightarrow Top
$$

for the [[full subcategory]] of [[Top]] on the Alexandrov spaces.

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

Every Alexandrov space is obtained by equipping its [[specialization order]] with the Alexandrov topology.

=--

+-- {: .num_cor}
###### Corollary

The specialization topology embeds the category $\Pros$ of preordered sets [[full subcategory|fully-faithfully]] in the category [[Top]] of topological spaces.  

$$
  Proset \hookrightarrow Top
  \,.
$$

If we restrict to a [[finite set|finite]] underlying set, then the categories $\Fin\Pros$ and $\Fin\Top$ of finite prosets and finite topological spaces are [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] in this way.


=--


### Alexandrov locales
 {#AlexandrovLocales}

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

Write $AlexLocale$ for the non-[[full subcategory|full]] [[subcategory]] of [[Locale]] whose

* [[object]]s are alexandrov locales, hence locales of the form $Alex P$ for $P\in Poset$ with $Open(Alex(P)) = UpSets(P)$;

* [[morphisms]] are those morphisms of locales $f : Alex P \to Alex Q$, for which the dual [[inverse image]] morphism of [[frame]]s $f^* : UpSet(Q) \to UpSet(P)$ has a [[left adjoint]] $f_! : UpSet(P) \to UpSet(Q)$.

=--

This appears as ([Caramello, p. 55](#Caramello)).

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

By the definition of the [[2-category]] [[Locale]] (see there), this means that $AlexPoset$ consists of those morphisms which have _right_ adjoints in [[Locale]].

=--

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The functor $Alex : Poset \to Locale$ factors through $AlexLocale$ and exhibits an [[equivalence of categories]]

$$
  Alex : Poset \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} AlexLocale
  \,.
$$

=--

This appears as ([Caramello, theorem 4.2](#Caramello)).


+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition


The category of Alexandrov locales is equivalent to that of completely distributive [[algebraic lattice]]s. 

=--

This appears as ([Caramello, remark 4.3](#Caramello)).

## References

* wikipedia [Alexandrov topology](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexandrov_topology)

The original article is

* [[Paul Alexandroff]], _Diskrete Räume_ ([[Alexandroff.pdf:file]]) (1973)

Details on Alexandrov spaces are in

* F. Arenas, _Alexandroff spaces_, Acta Math. Univ. Comenianae
Vol. LXVIII, 1 (1999), pp. 17–25 ([pdf](http://www.emis.de/journals/AMUC/_vol-68/_no_1/_arenas/arenas.pdf))

* Timothy Speer, _A Short Study of Alexandroff Spaces_ ([pdf](http://homepages.nyu.edu/~tjs312/Papers/AlexandroffSpaces/AlexandroffSpaces.pdf))

* Yu. Burago, M. Gromov, G. Perelman, _Alexandrov spaces with curvature bounded below_, Russ. Math. Surveys 1992.

A useful discussion of the abstract relation between posets and Alexandrov [[locales]] is in section 4.1 of

* Olivia Caramello, _A topos-theoretic approach to Stone-type dualities_ ([arXiv:1103.3493](http://arxiv.org/abs/1103.3493))
 {#Caramello}

See also around page 45 in

*  [[Peter Johnstone]], _[[Stone Spaces]]_

A discussion of [[abelian sheaf cohomology]] on Alexandrov spaces is in 

* Morten Brun, Winfried Bruns, Tim Römer, _Cohomology of partially ordered sets and local cohomology of section rings_ Advances in Mathematics 208 (2007) 210–235 ([pdf](http://www.home.uni-osnabrueck.de/wbruns/brunsw/pdf-article/BrunBrunsRoemer.published.pdf)) 

[[!redirects specialization topology]]
[[!redirects specialisation topology]]
[[!redirects Alexandrov topology]]
[[!redirects Alexandroff topology]]
[[!redirects Alexandrov space]]
[[!redirects Alexandrov spaces]]
[[!redirects Alexandroff space]]
[[!redirects Alexandroff spaces]]

[[!redirects Alexandrov locale]]
[[!redirects Alexandrov locales]]
[[!redirects Alexandroff locale]]
[[!redirects Alexandroff locales]]