
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include category theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--


#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Definition

$\Fin\Set$ is the [[category]] of [[finite set]]s and all [[function]]s between them: the [[full subcategory]] of [[Set]] on finite sets.  


(For [[constructive mathematics|constructive]] purposes, take the strictest sense of 'finite'.)

It is easy (and thus common) to make $\Fin\Set$ [[skeleton|skeletal]]; there is one [[object]] for each [[natural number]] $n$ (including $n = 0$), and a [[morphism]] from $m$ to $n$ is an $m$-tuple $(f_0, \ldots, f_{m-1})$ of numbers satisfying $0 \leq f_i \lt n$.  This amounts to identifying $n$ with the set $\{0, \ldots, n - 1\}$.  (Sometimes $\{1, \ldots, n\}$ is used instead.)

## Properties

### Opposite category
 {#OppositeCategory}

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

The [[opposite category]] of $FinSet$ is [[equivalence of categories|equivalent]] to that of finite [[Boolean algebras]]

$$
  FinSet^{op} \simeq FinBool
  \,.
$$

This equivalence is induced by the [[power set]]-[[functor]]

$$
  \mathcal{P} \;\colon\; FinSet^{op} \stackrel{\simeq}{\to} FinBool
  \,.
$$

=--

This is discussed for instance as ([Awodey, prop. 7.31](#Awodey)). For the generalization to all sets see at _[Set -- Properties -- Opposite category and Boolean algebras](Set#OppositeCategory)_. See at _[[Stone duality]]_ for more on this.

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

In constructive mathematics, for any flavor of _[[finite set|finite]]_, $\mathcal{P}$ defines an equivalence of $FinSet$ with the opposite category of that of those [[complete lattice|complete]] [[atom|atomic]] [[Heyting algebras]] whose set of atomic elements is finite (in the same sense as in the definition of $FinSet$).

=--

### Universal properties

$FinSet$ is the free category with finite coproducts on one object: that is, for any category $C$ with finite coproducts and any object $c \in C$ there is a functor $F : FinSet \to C$ preserving finite coproducts with $F(1) = c$, and $F$ is unique up to natural isomorphism.   

The first fact is closely connected to the fact that $FinSet$ is the [[vertical categorification]] of the set of natural numbers $\mathbb{N}$, and $\mathbb{N}$ is the [[free monoid]] on one generator. 

$FinSet$ is also the free category with finite colimits on one object: that is, for any category $C$ with finite colimits and any object $c \in C$ there is a functor $F : FinSet \to C$ preserving finite colimits with $F(1) = c$, and $F$ is unique up to natural isomorphism. 

$FinSet$ is also the free symmetric monoidal category on a commutative monoid object: that is, for any symmetric monoidal category $(C, \otimes)$ and any commutative monoid object $c \in C$ there is a symmetric monoidal functor $F : (FinSet,+) \to (C, \otimes)$ with $F(1) = c$, and $F$ is unique up to monoidal natural isomorphism.   

The last fact is closely connected to this: $FinSet$, made symmetric monoidal using $+$, is equivalent to the [[PROP]] for commutative monoids. A proof is given in Lafont's paper below.  Moreover, the sub-prop generated by the unit of the monoid consists of the monics, while the free prop generated by the multiplication of the monoid are the epics.

All these universal properties have useful duals.  $FinSet^{op}$ is the free category with finite products on one object and also the free category with finite limits on one object; the symmetric monoidal category $(FinSet, +)^{op}$ is equivalent to the PROP for cococommutative comonoids.

### In Grpd

$FinSet$ is a [[natural numbers object]] in the [[(2,1)-topos]] [[Grpd]] of [[groupoids]] and [[functors]], as it is an initial algebra of the 2-endofunctor $F(X) \cong 1 + X$. It is also a [[free object|free]] [[monoid object]] on one generator in [[Grpd]], an [[initial object|initial]] [[rig object]] in [[Grpd]], and a [[category]]. This all follows from the fact that the category $FinSet$ is the [[vertical categorification]] of the [[poset]] $\mathbb{N}$ of natural numbers. 

### In topos theory

The category $FinSet$ is an [[elementary topos]] and the inclusion $FinSet \hookrightarrow Set$ is a [[logical morphism]] of toposes. ([[Elephant|Elephant, example 2.1.2]]).

Mathematics done within or about $FinSet$ is [[finite mathematics]].

A [[presheaf]] of sets on $\Fin\Set$ is a [[symmetric set]]; one generally uses the skeletal version of $\Fin\Set$ for this.

The [[copresheaf]] category $[FinSet,Set]$ is the [[classifying topos]] for the _[[theory of objects]]_ (the empty theory over the signature with one sort and no primitive symbols except equality). ([[Elephant|Elephant, D3.2]]).


### Subcategories of $FinSet$

The [[simplex category]] $\Delta$ embeds into $\Fin\Set$ as a category with the same objects but fewer morphisms. The category of [[cyclic set]]s introduced by Connes lies in between. All the three are special cases of extensions of $\Delta$ by a group in a particularly nice way. Full classification of allowed [[skew-simplicial sets]] has been given by Krasauskas and independently by Loday and Fiedorowicz.

### As a Lawvere theory

The [[cartesian monoidal category]] $FinSet_+$ of nonempty finite sets is the multi-sorted [[Lawvere theory]] of unbiased [[boolean algebra]]s. As a [[Lawvere theory]], $FinSet$ has one more sort, corresponding to $\emptyset$, and one more model, in which every sort has exactly one element (in all the other models, the sort corresponding to $\emptyset$ is empty).




## Related concepts

* [[permutation category]]

* [[braid category]]

* [[finite homotopy type]]

* [[FinRel]]

## References

* [[Steve Awodey]], _[Category Theory](http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/80-413-713/) -- lecture 7_ ([pdf](http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/80-413-713/notes/chap07.pdf))
 {#Awodey}

* [[Yves Lafont]], Towards an algebraic theory of Boolean circuits, February 12, 2013.  ([pdf](http://iml.univ-mrs.fr/~lafont/pub/circuits.pdf))


category: category

[[!redirects category of finite sets]]
