
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Geometric quantization
+--{: .hide}
[[!include geometric quantization - contents]]
=--
#### Physics
+--{: .hide}
[[!include physicscontents]]
=--
#### Symplectic geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include symplectic geometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--



#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The _Guillemin-Sternberg conjecture_ states that, given a [[symplectic manifold]] equipped with a [[Hamiltonian action]] by some group, under suitable conditions the processes of [[geometric quantization]] and of [[symplectic reduction]] can be interchanged without changing the result (a [[representation]] of the [[group]] on the [[space of quantum states]]). This is usually abbreviated to: _quantization commutes with reduction_.

The original article ([Guillemin-Sternberg 82](#GuilleminSternberg82)) proved this statement for the case of [[compact Lie groups]] acting on [[compact topological space|compact]] [[Kähler manifolds]] and for [[geometric quantization]] via [[Kähler polarizations]].

For the more powerful and more flexible [[geometric quantization by push-forward]], the corresponding statement is widely known as the _Guillemin-Sternberg conjecture_.  Since its formulation, this, too, has been proven in fair generality, see the [References](#References) below.

## References
 {#References}

The original statement is due to

* [[Victor Guillemin]], [[Shlomo Sternberg]], _Geometric quantization and multiplicities of group representations, Invent. Math. 67 (1982), no. 3, 515–538.
 {#GuilleminSternberg82}

The first proof in [[geometric quantization by push-forward]] for compact groups acting on compact manifolds appears in 

* [[Eckhard Meinrenken]], _Symplectic surgery and the $Spin^c$-Dirac operator_, Adv. Math. 134 (1998), 240-277.

A survey is in 

* [[Michèle Vergne]], _Quantification géométrique et r´éduction symplectique, Séminaire Bourbaki, Vol. 2000/2001. Astérisque No. 282 (2002), Exp. No. 888, viii, 249–278.

The generalization to non-compact groups acting on non-compact spaces (but with compact quaotients) by passing to [[KK-theory]] and defining the push-forward by the Baum-Connes [[analytic assembly map]] was proposed in 

* [[Klaas Landsman]] _Functorial quantization and the Guillemin-Sternberg conjecture_. In S. Ali, G. Emch, A. Odzijewicz, M. Schlichenmaier, and S. Woronowicz (eds.), _Twenty years of Bialowieza: a mathematical anthology_, pages 23–45, Singapore, 2005. World Scientific. ([arXiv:math-ph/0307059](http://arxiv.org/abs/math-ph/0307059))

and proven for various cases in

* [[Peter Hochs]], [[Klaas Landsman]], _The Guillemin-Sternberg conjecture for noncompact groups and spaces_ ([arXiv:math-ph/0512022](http://arxiv.org/abs/math-ph/0512022))

based on

* [[Peter Hochs]], _Quantisation commutes with reduction for cocompact Hamiltonian group actions_ ([pdf](http://www.math.ru.nl/~landsman/ThesisPeterHochs.pdf))

The full statement for this general case was then proven in 

* [[Varghese Mathai]], [[Weiping Zhang]] (appendix by [[Ulrich Bunke]]), _Geometric quantization for proper actions_ ([arXiv:0806.3138](http://arxiv.org/abs/0806.3138))
 {#MathaiZhang}

[[!redirects geometric quantization conjecture]]
[[!redirects quantization commutes with reduction]]
[[!redirects reduction commutes with quantization]]
