+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### Model theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include model theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

One thinks of [[existential quantifier | existential quantification]] as _[[projection]]_. A theory eliminates quantifiers when "the projection of a primitive (quantifier-free) definable set is still primitive (quantifier-free)."

For example, suppose we're working in the theory of a [[vector space]] over a fixed field $\mathbb{F}$. Let $A$ be a linear transformation $\mathbb{F}^{n+1} \to \mathbb{F}^m$. Let $\vec{b}$ be an $m$-tuple, $x$ a variable, and $\vec{y}$ an $n$-tuple of variables. Then the solution set for

$$
\exists x A(x, \vec{y}) = \vec{b}
$$

is the projection of the solution set for

$$
A(x, \vec{y}) = \vec{b}
$$

to the $\vec{y}$-hyperplane. Since the projection of a (translated) hyperplane is again a (translated) hyperplane, there exists some $B : \mathbb{F}^n \to \mathbb{F}^m$ such that $B(\vec{y}) = \vec{b} \iff (\exists x) \left(A(x, \vec{y}) = \vec{b}\right).$

This is an instance of the fact that the theories of [[vector space | vector spaces]] over division rings admits quantifier elimination. It's nice when this happens, and when it doesn't, one asks for minimal ways to expand the language to make it happen. That [[ACF]] eliminates quantifiers is a special case of [[Chevalley's theorem on constructible sets]] ("the image of a constructible set is constructible").

Often, in order to prove quantifier-elimination, one develops an _effective_ procedure for reducing an arbitrary sentence to a quantifier-free one, which shows that the theory is [[decidability|decidable]]; this is how Tarski proved that the theory [[RCF]] of real closed fields is decidable. 

## Definition
An $\mathcal{L}$-theory $T$ **eliminates quantifiers** if every $\mathcal{L}$-formula $\varphi(x)$ is equivalent to a quantifier-free $\mathcal{L}$-formula $\psi(x)$, i.e.

$$
T \models \varphi(x) \leftrightarrow \psi(x).
$$  

## Remarks

* Any theory is [[interpretation|bi-interpretable]] with an expanded theory where every definable set is named with a predicate, called its [[coherent logic|Morleyization]], which eliminates quantifiers.

* Therefore, whether or not a structure has quantifier elimination depends on the language being used to describe the structure.

* Quantifier elimination implies [[model complete theory | model completeness]]: all submodels are elementary submodels and all models are [[existentially closed theory | existentially closed]].

* It is an informative exercise to try to prove QE syntactically (a "tractable" case like [[DLO]] suffices) to appreciate the usefulness of the semantic/model-theoretic characterization of QE below.

* The characterizations below (and in general important tools in model theory like the [[compactness theorem]], the [[Lowenheim-Skolem theorem]], etc.) only work for _infinite_ models.

* Since quantifier elimination is equivalent to [[substructure complete theory#substructureconverse|substructure completeness]] and [[elementary equivalence|elementarily equivalent]] finite structures are isomorphic, (the theory of a) finite [[first-order structure]] eliminates quantifiers if and only if it is [[Fraisse limit|ultrahomogeneous]].

## Semantic characterizations of QE

+-- {: .num_prop}
###### Proposition

A first-order theory $T$ eliminates quantifiers if and only if it is substructure-complete: $T$ plus the [[quantifier-free diagram]] of any substructure of any model of $T$ form a complete theory.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

See [[substructure complete theory#QEiffsubstructurecomplete|substructure completeness]].

=--

+-- {: .num_theorem #QEcriterion}
###### Theorem

Let $T$ be a theory. The following are equivalent: 

1. $T$ eliminates quantifiers.

2. For every $M$ and $N$ models of $T$ such that $N$ is $|M|^+$-[[type (in model theory)|saturated]] and every proper substructure $A \subseteq M$ such that there is an embedding $i \colon A \to N$, there exists a proper intermediate substructure $A'$, $A \subsetneq A' \subseteq M$ and an extension $i' \colon A' \to N$ of $i$ to $A'$.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

(1. $\implies$ 2.) Suppose $T$ eliminates quantifiers. Since this is equivalent to [[substructure-completeness]], choose $x \in M \backslash A$, and let $B \overset{df}{=} \langle A \cup \{x\} \rangle$ be the substructure of $M$ generated by $A \cup \{x\}.$ Then, since quantifier-free statements are transferred by embeddings, the [[type (in model theory)]] of $x$ over $A$ in $M$ is finitely realized in $N$ and therefore realized via $|M|^+$-saturation by some $x'$.

A standard [[back-and-forth argument]] starting at $x'$ lets us build our required extension.

(2. $\implies$ 1.) By possibly transfinitely iterating 2., we obtain an embedding $M \to N.$ As we can always embed a $T$-model inside a larger, arbitrarily saturated $T$-model, we therefore have [[model completeness|amalgamation]].

This gives [[model completeness]]: since model completeness is equivalent to every $T$-submodel being an [[elementary embedding|elementary submodel]], it suffices by the Tarski-Vaught test (and an induction on complexity of formulas) to test that whenever $m$ is a tuple from $M$, $\varphi(x,y)$ is a quantifier-free formula, and $N \models \exists x \varphi(x, m)$, then $M \models \exists x \varphi(x,m)$ (i.e. that $M$ is [[existentially closed]].)

Embed $M$ into a sufficiently saturated elementary extension $^*M$ (by taking a large enough [[ultrapower]], if you like). Then by (2.), the elementary embedding $M \preceq ^*M$ extends along the embedding $M \hookrightarrow N$ to an embedding $N \hookrightarrow ^*M$. If $N \models \exists x \varphi(x,m)$, then there is a witness $n \in N$ such that $N \models \varphi(n,m)$. Since $\varphi$ was quantifier-free, this transfers along the embedding $N \hookrightarrow ^*M$, so that $^*M \models \varphi(n,m)$, and therefore $^*M \models \exists x \varphi(x,m).$ This then transfers down the elementary embedding $M \preceq ^*M$, so $M \models \exists x \varphi(x,m).$ Since $M$ and $N$ were arbitrary, $T$ is model complete.

Since [[model completeness#substructureconverse|model completeness + amalgamation implies substructure completeness]] and [[substructure complete theory#QEiffsubstructurecomplete|substructure completeness is equivalent to quantifier elimination]], the theorem is proved.

=--

+-- {: .num_cor}
###### Corollary

  [[ACF]] admits quantifier elimination. Furthermore, the theories $\mathsf{ACF}_p$ (where $p$ is specification of the characteristic) are complete.

=--

+-- {: .proof}
###### Proof

We put ourselves into the situation of the above theorem. Let $E$ and $F$ be algebraically closed fields such that $F$ is $|E|^+$-saturated. Let $R$ be a subring of $E$ with $i : R \to F$ an embedding. As $E$ is a field, $R$ is an integral domain, and thus $E$ contains the fraction field $\operatorname{Frac}(R)$ of $R$. The embedding $i$ extends uniquely to $\operatorname{Frac}(R)$. By a back-and-forth argument, $i$ extends uniquely to $\operatorname{Frac}(R)^{\operatorname{alg}}$. Therefore, we can assume that $R$ is algebraically closed. Let $a \in E \backslash R$. Then $a$ is transcendental over $R$, and by saturation its [[type (in model theory) | type]] is realized by some $b \in F$ which is transcendental over the image $i(R)$ of $R$ under $i$. Then $a \mapsto b$ induces an embedding $R[a] \overset{i'}{\to} i(R)[b]$, which extends $i$. Thus the hypotheses of the theorem are satisfied and [[ACF]] admits QE.

That $\mathsf{ACF}$ becomes complete after specifying a characteristic follows from the fact that in any theory with quantifier elimination, naming a substructure (thus passing to the theory of all models which contain a copy of that substructure) makes the theory complete, and every field of characteristic $p$ contains the prime field of characteristic $p$.

=--



## QE extends to co-slice categories
Let $T$ eliminate quantifiers. Let $K$ be a substructure (not necessarily a submodel) of some model $A$ of $T$. Then the theory $T/K$ of models of $T$ interpreting a copy of $K$ also has quantifier elimination.

In particular, if we specialize to [[ACF]], this tells us that not only do all algebraically closed fields admit quantifier elimination in the language of rings, but so do all algebraically closed fields containing a fixed ring $R$ (i.e. the geometric points of $\operatorname{Spec}(R)$), in the language of rings with constants for the elements of $R$.

## Related concepts
* [[quantification]]

* [[quantifier-free diagram]]

* [[decidability]]

## References

* wikipedia [quantifier elimination](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantifier_elimination)
* Wilfrid Hodges, _Model Theory_, Cambridge University Press 1993

category: logic, model theory
[[!redirects quantifier elimination]]
[[!redirects quantifier-elimination]]