+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Functional analysis
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functional analysis - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

Multilinear maps between [[locally convex topological vector spaces]] are important in many respects not least because of their use in infinite dimensional calculus as the homes of higher derivatives.  However, outside the realm of [[normed vector spaces]], there is no natural choice of topology on the spaces of multilinear maps.

## Definition

The definition of an $n$-linear map is straightforward and is an application of the definition at [[bilinear map]].

+-- {: .num_defn #mult}
###### Definition
Let $V$ and $W$ be [[vector spaces]] and $n \in \mathbb{N}$.  The space of $n$-linear mappings $V \to W$, written $L^n(V,W)$, is the space of set maps $V^n \to W$ with the property that they are linear in each variable.

For $n = 1$ we write $L(V,W)$ and we extend the notation to $n = 0$ where by $L^0(V,W)$ we mean just $W$.
=--

When $V$ and $W$ are [[LCTVS]] we can restrict to continuous maps.

+-- {: .num_defn #cmult}
###### Definition
Let $V$ and $W$ be [[locally convex topological vector spaces]] and $n \in \mathbb{N}$.  The space of continuous $n$-linear mappings $V \to W$, written $\mathcal{L}^n(V,W)$, is the space of continuous maps $V^n \to W$ with the property that they are linear in each variable.

For $n = 1$ we write $\mathcal{L}(V,W)$ and we extend the notation to $n = 0$ where by $\mathcal{L}^0(V,W)$ we mean just $W$.
=--

There are a variety of topologies that one can put on the spaces $\mathcal{L}^n(V,W)$.  The most common are the topologies of uniform convergence on some family of [[bounded sets]] of the source.

+-- {: .num_defn #cmtop}
###### Definition
Let $V$ and $W$ be [[LCTVS]] and $n \in \mathbb{N}$.  Let $\mathcal{S}$ be a collection of [[bounded subsets]] of $V$ which covers $V$.  Define $\Lambda_{\mathcal{S}}$ to be the topology on $\mathcal{L}^n(V,W)$ given by uniform convergence on $\mathcal{S}$.  That is, it is the [[LCTVS]] structure on $\mathcal{L}^n(V,W)$ defined by the family of [[semi-norms]]:
$$
\rho(u)_{\sigma,S} \coloneqq \sup \{\sigma(u(h_1,\dots,h_n)) : h_i \in S\}
$$
where $S \in \mathcal{S}$ and $\sigma \colon W \to \mathbb{R}$ is a continuous semi-norm on $W$.

We write $\mathcal{L}^n_{\mathcal{S}}(V,W)$ for the [[LCTVS]] with underlying vector space $\mathcal{L}^n(V,W)$ and topology $\Lambda_{\mathcal{S}}$.
=--

The commonest families in use are:

1. The finite subsets.  This resulting topology is known as the **simple** topology and the usual notations are $\Lambda_s$ and $\mathcal{L}_s(V,W)$.
1. The compact subsets, with notations $\Lambda_k$ and $\mathcal{L}_k(V,W)$.
1. The [[precompact subsets]], with notations $\Lambda_{p k}$ and $\mathcal{L}_{p k}(V,W)$.
1. The [[bounded subsets]], with notations $\Lambda_b$ and $\mathcal{L}_b(V,W)$.

Of all the topologies definable using Definition \ref{cmtop}, the topology $\Lambda_s$ is the coarsest and $\Lambda_b$ the finest.

The topology of simple convergence ($\Lambda_s$) also makes sense on the spaces $L^n(V,W)$ and we write $L_s^n(V,W)$ for the resulting LCTVS.  We have that $\mathcal{L}_s^n(V,W) \subseteq L^n_s(V,W) \subset W^{V^n}$ (with the product topology) are topological embeddings.

## Properties

1. For any suitable family of [[bounded sets]], $\mathcal{S}$, the natural map $\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{S}}^{n+m}(V,W) \to \mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{S}}^n(V,\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{S}}^m(V,W))$ is a topological embedding.

1. If $V$ is [[metrisable]], $W$ arbitrary, and $\mathcal{S}$ contains all [[compact]] sets then $\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{S}}^{n+m}(V,W) \to \mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{S}}^n(V,\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{S}}^m(V,W))$ is an isomorphism.

1. If $V$ is [[metrisable]] and [[barrelled]], $W$ arbitrary, and $\mathcal{S}$ arbitrary then $\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{S}}^{n+m}(V,W) \to \mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{S}}^n(V,\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{S}}^m(V,W))$ is an isomorphism.

## Separate Continuity

The definition of $\mathcal{L}^n(V,W)$ requires the maps $V^n \to W$ to be continuous in the product topology.  On the other hand, the linearity is required only on a per-factor basis.  It is possible to make the continuity requirement also work on a per-factor basis using the notion of [[hypocontinuity]].  For this we need to fix the type of continuity first.

+-- {: .num_defn #smult}
Let $V$ and $W$ be [[LCTVS]] and $n \in \mathbb{N}$.  Let $\mathcal{S}$ be a family of [[bounded subsets]] of $V$ which cover $V$.  We define $\mathcal{H}^n_{\mathcal{S}}(V,W)$ inductively by:

1. $\mathcal{H}^0(V,W) \coloneqq W$
2. $\mathcal{H}^n_{\mathcal{S}}(V,W) \coloneqq \mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{S}}(V, \mathcal{H}^{n-1}_{\mathcal{S}}(V,W))$.
=--

## Properties

1. $\mathcal{L}^n_{\mathcal{S}}(V,W) \to \mathcal{H}^n_{\mathcal{S}}(V,W)$ is a topological embedding.
1. If $\mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{S}'$ then $\mathcal{H}^n_{\mathcal{S}'}(V,W)$ injects continuously into $\mathcal{H}^n_{\mathcal{S}}(V,W)$.
2. $\mathcal{H}^n_s(V,W)$ consists of the [[separately continuous]] multilinear maps $V^n \to W$.
3. If $V$ is [[metrisable]] and $\mathcal{S}$ contains all compact sets, or if $V$ is [[metrisable]] and [[barrelled]], then for any $W$ and $n$, $\mathcal{L}^n_{\mathcal{S}}(V,W) = \mathcal{H}^n_{\mathcal{S}}(V,W)$.

