
This entry collects links for the book

* [[Bruce Blackadar]], 

  _K-Theory for Operator Algebras_

  Cambridge University Press 1986, second ed. 1999

on [[operator K-theory]] and [[KK-theory]].

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc} 

## Chapter I. Introduction to K-theory

### 1. Survey of topological K-theory

* [[topological K-theory]]

### 2. Overview of operator K-theory

* [[operator K-theory]]

## Chapter II. Preliminaries

### 3. Local Banach algebras and inductive limits

* [[Banach algebra]]

### 4. Idempotents and Equivalence

* [[idempotent]]

## Chapter III. $K_0$-theory and order

### 5. Basic $K_0$-theory

(...)

### 6. Order structure on $K_0$

(...)


### 7. Theore of AF algebras

(...)


## Chapter IV. $K_1$-theory and Bott periodicity

### 8. Higher K-groups

(...)


### 9. Bott periodictiy

* [[Bott periodicity]]

## Chapter V. $K$-theory of crossed products

### 10. The Pimsner-Voiculescu exact sequence and Connes' Thom isomorphism

* [[crossed product C*-algebra]]

* [[Thom isomorphism]]

### 11. Equivariant K-theory

* [[equivariant K-theory]]

## Chapter VI. More preliminaries

### 12. Multiplier algebras

* [[multiplier algebra]]

### 13. Hilbert modules

* [[Hilbert module]]

### 14. Graded $C^\ast$-algebra

* [[graded C*-algebra]]

## Chapter VII. Theory of extensions

### 15. Basic theory of extensions

(...)

### 16. Brown-Douglas-Fillmore theory and other applications

(...)

## Chapter VIII. KK-theory

### 17. Basic theory

* [[KK-theory]]

### 18. The intersection product

(...)

### 19. Further structure in KK-theory

(...)

### 20. Equivariant KK-theory

* [[equivariant KK-theory]]

## Chapter IX. Further topics

### 21. Homology and Cohomology Theories on $C^\ast$-algebras

(...)

### 22. Axiomatic K-theory

(...)

### 23. Universal coefficient theorems and Künneth theorems

* [[universal coefficient theorem]]

* [[Künneth theorem]]

### 24. Survey of applications to geometry and topology

(...)

### 25. E-theory

* [[E-theory]]




category: reference