Grothendieck's Galois theory was constructed in order to define for schemes an analogue of the following correspondence

: covering spaces of $X$ : $\pi_1(X)$-sets

for a path connected, semilocally simply connected topological space $X$. The objects on the left are not difficult to define for schemes (at least naively - one really needs trivialisations over etale [[coverage|covers]]), but there is no fundamental group defined in terms of loops. The reason Galois's name is attached to this theory is that in the case of the scheme $Spec(k)$, the objects corresponding to the covering spaces are simply field extensions $Spec(k')$. The fundamental group of schemes defined in this way is the [[algebraic fundamental group]], and is a [[profinite group]].

###Preliminaries###

**Definition:** Given an arrow $f:x \to y$ in a category $C$ the _category of arrows compatible with $f$_, denoted $Comp(f)$ is the full subcategory of $x \downarrow C$ on the arrows that coequalize the same pairs $g,h:w\rightrightarrows x$ that $f$ does.

**Definition:** An arrow $f:x\to y$ in a category $C$ is a _strict epimorphism_ if it is initial in $Comp(f)$.

It is not obvious, but a strict epimorphism is an epimorphism.

###Grothendieck's axioms###

In what follows, Let $C$ be a category and $F:C \to Set$ a functor. The axioms presented here are as in

E. Dubuc and C. S. de la Vega _On the Galois theory on Grothendieck_, Bol. Acad. Nac. Cienc. (Cordoba) **65** (2000) 111-136. [arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/math.CT/0009145)

Some terminology: $X\in C$ is called _finite_ if $F(X)$ is a finite set. Let $\int_F C$ denote the [[category of elements]] of $F$, in which an object $(X,a)$ is called finite if $X$ is finite.

G0) The full subcategory of $\int_F C$ on the finite objects is [[cofinal]].

G1) $C$ has all finite limits

G2) $C$ has an initial object, finite coproducts and [[quotient|quotients]] by finite groups

G3) Given $f:x\to z$ in $C$ there is a factorisation $x \stackrel{e}{\to} y \stackrel{i}{\to} z$ where $e$ is a strict epimorphism and $i$ is a mono. Also, $y$ is assumed to be a direct summand of $z$.

G4) $F$ preserves finite limits

G5) $F$ preserves initial object, finite sums, quotients by finite group actions and sends strict epimorphisms to surjections

G6) $F$ reflects isomorphisms

***

It follows from the axioms that $F$ is a [[prorepresentable functor]]. The automorphisms of the [[pro-object]] $P$ representing $F$ form (should be. I'm not familiar enough with pro-objects) a profinite group $\pi$. This acts on $F(X) = [P,-]$ by precomposition (talking out of my depth here - it's getting a bit heuristic) and so $F$ lifts to a functor to $\pi-Set$, and Grothendieck's result is that this functor is an equivalence.

There are several modifications one can make the above. In the case that $C$ is the category of covering spaces of a nice enough space, the functor $F$ is representable by the universal covering space, and so there is a 'representable' version of the above, not needing to utilise profinite groups. One can also consider just the connected-objects version, and end up with an equivalence to the category of _transitive_ $\pi$-sets.



---
<http://mathoverflow.net/questions/32418/grothendiecks-galois-theory-today>

nLab page on [[nlab:Grothendieck's Galois theory]]
