
#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

For a given [[manifold]] $X$ a _Baum-Douglas geoemtric cycle_ on $X$ is data consisting of a [[submanifold]] $Q \hookrightarrow X$ vcarrying a [[vector bundle]] $E\to X$ such that this represents a class in [[K-homology]] under a suitable [[equivalence relation]].

Viewed as a [[correspondence]] of the form

$$
  X \stackrel{}{\leftarrow} (Q,E) \to \ast
$$

a Baum-Douglas geometric cycle is a special case of the spans that represent classes in [[KK-theory]] (between manifolds) according to ([Connes-Skandalis 84, section 3](#ConnesSkandalis84)).

## References

The original articles are

* [[Paul Baum]], R. Douglas, _K-homology and index theory: Operator Algebras and Applications (R. Kadison editor), volume 38 of Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Math., 117-173,
Providence RI, 1982. AMS.

* [[Paul Baum]], R. Douglas. _Index theory, bordism, and K-homology_, Contemp. Math. 10: 1-31 1982.

A generalization to [[twisted K-theory|twisted]] homology is discussed in section of

* [[Bai-Ling Wang]], _Geometric cycles, index theory and twisted K-homology_,  Journal of Noncommutative Geometry ([arXiv:0710.1625](http://arxiv.org/abs/0710.1625))


A generalization to geometric (co)-cocycles for KK-theory is in section 3 of 

* [[Alain Connes]], [[Georges Skandalis]], _The longitudinal index theorem for foliations_. Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 20,
no. 6, 1139–1183 (1984) ([pdf](http://www.alainconnes.org/docs/longitudinal.pdf))
 {#ConnesSkandalis84}

More generally, a construction of general [[homology theories]] in a similar fashion is discussed in 

* S. Buoncristiano, C. P. Rourke and B. J. Sanderson, _A geometric approach to homology theory_, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, Mass. (1976)

and a construction of [[bivariant cohomology theories]] in this spirit is in 

* Martin Jakob, _Bivariant theories for smooth manifolds_, Applied Categorical Structures 10 no. 3 (2002)


[[!redirects Baum-Douglas geometric cycles]]
