

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### String theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include string theory - contents]]
=--
#### Quantum field theory
+--{: .hide}
[[!include functorial quantum field theory - contents]]
=--
#### Super-Geometry
+--{: .hide}
[[!include supergeometry - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

In [[perturbative string theory]] [[scattering amplitudes]] are defined as in [[quantum field theory]], but with [[n-point functions]] of 1-dimensional [[worldline]] theories replaced by those of [[worldsheet]] [[2d CFTs]]. 

## Properties

### Finiteness
 {#Finiteness}

The amplitudes are thought (see the commented [references below](#References)) to come out term-wise (for each "loop order" hence for each [[genus]] and number of punctures of ([[super Riemann surface|super]]-)[[Riemann surfaces]]) finite (at least UV-finite), hence [[renormalization|renormalized]]: the higher string oscillations may be seen as providing canonical counterterms for the massless excitations in the [[effective field theory]]. In this sense string theory provides a [[UV-completion]] of these effective field theories ([[supergravity]] coupled to [[Yang-Mills theory]]).

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

The full [[perturbation series]] is the [[sum]] of all these (finite) contributions over the [[genus|genera]] of [[Riemann surfaces]] (the "loop orders"). This _sum_ diverges, even if all loop orders are finite. Notice though, that a non-trivial [[perturbation theory|perturbative]] [[QFT]] is not supposed to have a finite [[radius of convergence]] of its scattering amplitudes, since that would imply convergence also for _negative_ [[coupling constant]], which is physically unreasonable. (For the [[bosonic string]] the perturbation series has apparently been explicitly shown not to be [[Borel summation|Borel resummable]].) For more on this see at _[[non-perturbative effect]]_ and _[string theory FAQ -- Is the divergence of the pertubation series fatal?](string+theory+FAQ#NonConvergenceOfPerturbationSeries)_.

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

A string scattering amplitude is called _UV-finite_ at a given loop order ([[genus]] of a [[Riemann surface]] $\Sigma$ with $n$ marked points/string insertions) if the [[correlation function]] $\langle \phi_1, \cdots, \phi_n\rangle_{\Sigma}$ is finite for every single such [[Riemann surface]]. The actual string amplitude at order $(g,n)$ though is the avraging of this over all possible [[conformal structures]] on $\Sigma$, hence the  [[integration]] of the [[correlation function]], as a function on the conformal structure, over the compactified [[moduli space of conformal structures]] $\mathcal{M}_{g,n}$ (a [[Deligne-Mumford stack]]). 

If also this integral is finite, hence if the total [[measure]] on the [[moduli space of conformal structures]] is finite, then one says the amplitude is _IR-finite_.

This distinction between UV-finiteness and IR-finiteness is not always highlighted in all of the articles below. All authors argue that the string is _UV-finite_ to all order. The IR-finiteness is only discussed much more recently at low loop order.

IR non-finiteness is not physically fatal. For instance if a [[perturbation theory|perturbative]] theory of [[quantum gravity]] develops a [[cosmological constant]] perturbatively, then the perturbation series will be IR-divergent, signifying the fact that background spacetime without cosmological constant is no longer a solution to the quantum-corrected [[equations of motion]]. Nevertheless, these potential IR-divergences seem to be absent for the [[superstring]] perturbation series. For the [[cosmological constant]] case this can already be seen from the fact that the [[effective QFT]] of [[type II supergravity]] etc. does not admit a cosmological constant, for that would violate [[supersymmetry]].

=--

### Open-closed scattering duality and KLT relations

The [[open/closed string duality]] implies certain relations in string scattering amplitudes that in the point-particle limit induces relations between [[scattering amplitudes]] in [[Yang-Mills theory]] and in [[gravity]]. These are the _[[KLT relations]]_ in [[QFT]].

### Twistor string amplitudes and MHV amplitudes in Yang-Mills theory

The scattering amplitudes in [[twistor string theory]] induce the MHV amplitudes in ([[super Yang-Mills theory|super]]-)[[Yang-Mills theory]]. See at _[[string theory results applied elsewhere]]_ in the section _[Application to QCD -- Scattering amplitudes](string+theory+results+applied+elsewhere#QCDScatteringAmplitudes)_.

### $p$-Adic formulation

The [[Veneziano amplitude]] (open bosonic string tree-level scattering) has an equivalent formulation as the inverse product over all [[prime numbers]] $p$ of an amplitude computed not by an integral in the real but in the [[p-adic numbers]]. For other open string amplitudes this holds up to some regularization. This is the topic of _[[p-adic string theory]]_, see there for more details.

## Examples

* [[Veneziano amplitude]]

* [[Virasoro-Shapiro amplitude]]

* [[vacuum amplitude]]

## Related entries

* [[scattering amplitude]]

* [[perturbation theory]], [[perturbative string theory]]

* [[non-perturbative effect]], [[M-theory]]

* [[string theory FAQ]], [[string theory results applied elsewhere]]

## References
 {#References}

### General

Survey of the tree level string scattering amplitudes includes

* [[Ralph Blumenhagen]], [[Dieter Lüst]], [[Stefan Theisen]], _String Scattering Amplitudes and Low Energy Effective Field Theory_, chapter 16 in _Basic Concepts of String Theory_ Part of the series Theoretical and Mathematical Physics pp 585-639 Springer 2013

Survey of the presence and role of divergencies includes

* [[Ashoke Sen]], _Ultraviolet and Infrared Divergences in Superstring Theory_ ([arXiv:1512.00026](http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.00026))

For more references see also at _[[string theory results applied elsewhere]]_.


### Higher order corrections

* [[Christopher Pope]],  _Higher-order corrrections in String and M-theory and Generalized Holonomies_, December 2006 ([pdf](http://www.luth.obspm.fr/IHP06/workshops/cosmo/slides/Pope.pdf))

### On finiteness
 {#ReferencesOnFiniteness}

Here is a commented list of references on the degreewise [finiteness of string scattering amplitudes](#Finiteness).

#### Bosonic string

Introductory lecture notes include

* Wieland Staessens, Bert Vercnocke, _Lectures on Scattering Amplitudes in String Theory_, Lecture notes based on lectures given at the fifth Modave School on Mathematical Physics (August 2009) ([arXiv:1011.0456](http://arxiv.org/abs/1011.0456))
 {#StaessensVernocke10}

Discussion of the term-wise finiteness of the bosonic string scattering amplitudes is in

* L. Clavelli, S. T. Jones, _Finiteness of the bosonic string in fewer than 26 dimensions_, Phys. Rev. D 39, 3795–3797 (1989) ([SPIRE](http://inspirehep.net/record/24403))

There are also arguments in 

* Simon Davis, _On the domain of string perturbation theory_, Classical and Quantum Gravity, Volume 6, Issue 12, pp. 1791-1803 (1989) ([web](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1989CQGra...6.1791D))

#### Superstring

A review is in the last section of ([Staessens-Vernocke 10](#StaessensVernocke10)). A general discussion of the problem of superstring amplitudes is in 

* [[Eric D'Hoker]] [[Duong Phong]], _Loop amplitudes for the fermionic string_, Nucl. Phys. B 278 (1986) 225;

* [[Greg Moore]], P. Nelson, [[Joseph Polchinski]], _Strings and supermoduli_, Phys. Lett. B 169 (1986) 47-53.

Finiteness of heterotic and type II superstring $n$-point functions in flat spacetime is argued for in

* Joseph Atick, [[Gregory Moore]], [[Ashoke Sen]], _Catoptrick tadpoles_, Nucl.Phys. B307 (1988) 221 ([spire](http://inspirehep.net/record/252598?ln=en))

General finiteness of superstring amplitudes is discussed in 

* [[Stanley Mandelstam]], _The $n$ Loop String Amplitude: Explicit Formulas, Finiteness and Absence of Ambiguities_, Phys. Lett. B277 (1992) 82. ([inspire](http://inspirehep.net/record/319501))

which shows that a certain divergence which could appear does not.

Also 

* A. Restuccia, J. Taylor, _Finiteness of type II superstring amplitudes_, Physics Letters B, Volume 187, Issues 3–4, 26 March 1987, Pages 267–272

argues finiteness of the superstring amplitudes at each order.

Also

* [[Eric D'Hoker]], [[Duong Phong]], _Momentum Analyticity and Finiteness of the 1-Loop Superstring Amplitude_,  	Phys.Rev.Lett. 70 (1993) 3692-3695 ([arXiv:hep-th/9302003](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9302003))

* [[Eric D'Hoker]], [[Duong Phong]], _The Box Graph In Superstring Theory_, Nucl.Phys.B440:24-94,1995 ([arXiv:hep-th/9410152](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9410152))

* [[Eric D'Hoker]], [[Duong Phong]], _Dispersion Relations in String Theory_; Nucl.Phys.B440:24-94,1995 ([arXiv:hep-th/9404128](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9404128))

The 1-loop amplitudes in [[type II string theory]] have been discussed in 

* [[Michael Green]], [[John Schwarz]], _Supersymmetrical string theories_, Phys. Lett. 109 B (1982) 444-448.

and for [[heterotic string theory]] in 

* [[David Gross]], J.A. Harvey, E.J. Martinec and R. Rohm, _Heterotic String Theory (II). The interacting heterotic string_, Nucl. Phys. B267 (1986) 75.

The description of 2-loop amplitudes, including the integration over the super-[[moduli space of conformal structures]] in superstring theory is given in the series of articles

* [[Eric D'Hoker]], [[Duong Phong]], _Two-Loop Superstrings I, Main Formulas_, Phys.Lett.B529:241-255,2002 ([arXiv:hep-th/0110247](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0110247))

* [[Eric D'Hoker]], [[Duong Phong]], _Two-Loop Superstrings II, The Chiral Measure on Moduli Space_, Nucl.Phys.B636:3-60,2002 ([arXiv:hep-th/0110283](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0110283))

* [[Eric D'Hoker]], [[Duong Phong]], _Two-Loop Superstrings III, Slice Independence and Absence of Ambiguities_, Nucl.Phys.B636:61-79,2002 ([arXiv:hep-th/0111016](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0111016))

* [[Eric D'Hoker]], [[Duong Phong]], _Two-Loop Superstrings IV, The Cosmological Constant and Modular Forms_, Nucl.Phys.B639:129-181,2002 ([arXiv:hep-th/0111040](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0111040))

* [[Eric D'Hoker]], [[Duong Phong]], _Two-Loop Superstrings V: Gauge Slice Independence of the N-Point Function_,  	Nucl.Phys.B715:91-119,2005 ([arXiv:hep-th/0501196](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0501196))

* [[Eric D'Hoker]], [[Duong Phong]], _Two-Loop Superstrings VI: Non-Renormalization Theorems and the 4-Point Function_,  	Nucl.Phys.B715:3-90,2005 ([arXiv:hep-th/0501197](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0501197))

* [[Eric D'Hoker]], [[Duong Phong]], _Two-Loop Superstrings VII, Cohomology of Chiral Amplitudes_,  	Nucl.Phys.B804:421-506,2008 ([arXiv:0711.4314](http://arxiv.org/abs/0711.4314))

A review of this work is in 

* A.Morozov, _NSR Superstring Measures Revisited_, JHEP0805:086,2008 ([arXiv:0804.3167](http://arxiv.org/abs/0804.3167))

The technical issue of the [[moduli space]] of [[super Riemann surfaces]] of higher genus (for higher loop string scattering amplitudes) is discussed in

* [[Edward Witten]], _Notes On Super Riemann Surfaces And Their Moduli_ ([arXiv:1209.2459](http://arxiv.org/abs/1209.2459))

* [[Ron Donagi]], [[Edward Witten]], _Supermoduli Space Is Not Projected_ ([arXiv:1304.7798](http://arxiv.org/abs/1304.7798))

Arguments for the finiteness of superstring scattering amplitudes to all loop order based on the [[Berkovits superstring]]-formulation have been promoted in 

* [[Nathan Berkovits]], _Multiloop Amplitudes and Vanishing Theorems using the Pure Spinor Formalism for the Superstring_,  JHEP 0409:047,2004 ([arXiv:hep-th/0406055](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0406055))

(In footnote 2 this article claims that the claimed proofs of the same statement by G.S Danilov in [hep-th/9801013](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9801013), [hep-th/0312177](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0312177) are not in fact proofs.)

Discussion of 2-loop amplitudes from holomorphy arguments is in 

* [[Edward Witten]], _Notes On Holomorphic String And Superstring Theory Measures Of Low Genus_ ([arXiv:1306.3621](http://arxiv.org/abs/1306.3621))

See also

* [[Ashoke Sen]], _Supersymmetry Restoration in Superstring Perturbation Theory_ ([arXiv:1508.02481](http://arxiv.org/abs/1508.02481))



### More

On point-particle limit via [[tropical geometry]]

* Piotr Tourkine, _Tropical Amplitudes_ ([arXiv:1309.3551](http://arxiv.org/abs/1309.3551))

[[!redirects string scattering amplitudes]]

[[!redirects string scatt]]