
* [Wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chen_Ning_Yang)

Introducing [[Yang-Mills theory]] (eventually: [[quantum chromodynamics]]):

* [[Chen Ning Yang]], [[Robert Mills]], _Conservation of Isotopic Spin and Isotopic Gauge Invariance_. Physical Review 96 (1): 191&#8211; 195. (1954) ([web](http://prola.aps.org/abstract/PR/v96/i1/p191_1))

## Quotes
 {#Quotes}

On [[Yang-Mills theory]] ([[gauge theory]]) being about [[connection on a bundle|connections]] on [[principal bundles]]/[[fiber bundles]]:

Yang wrote in  _C. N. Yang, Selected papers, 1945-1980, with commentary_, W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 1983, on p. 567:

> In 1975, impressed with the fact that [[gauge fields]] are [[connection on a bundle|connections]] on [[fiber bundles]], I drove to the house of [[Shiing-shen Chern|S. S. Chern]] in El Cerrito, near Berkeley... I said I found it amazing that [[gauge theory]] are exactly [[connection on a bundle|connections]] on [[fiber bundles]], which the mathematicians developed without reference to the physical world. I added: "this is both thrilling and puzzling, since you mathematicians dreamed up these concepts out of nowhere." He immediately protested: "No, no. These concepts were not dreamed up. They were natural and real."

Yang expanded on this passage in an interview recorded as: _C. N. Yang and contemporary mathematics_, chapter in: Robin Wilson, Jeremy Gray (eds.), _Mathematical Conversations: Selections from The Mathematical Intelligencer_, Springer 2001, on p. 72 ([GoogleBooks](https://books.google.de/books?id=e0TTBwAAQBAJ&lpg=PA72&dq=Yang%20was%20not%20just%20joy.%20There%20was%20something%20more%2C%20something%20deeper%3A%20After%20all%2C%20what%20could%20be%20more%20mysterious%2C%20what%20could%20be%20more%20awe-inspiring%2C%20than%20to%20find%20that%20the%20structure%20of%20the%20physical%20world%20is%20intimately%20tied%20to%20the%20deep%20mathematical%20concepts%2C%20concepts%20which%20were%20developed%20out%20of%20considerations%20rooted%20only%20in%20logic%20and%20the%20beauty%20of%20form%3F&pg=PA72#v=onepage&q=Yang%20was%20not%20just%20joy.%20There%20was%20something%20more,%20something%20deeper:%20After%20all,%20what%20could%20be%20more%20mysterious,%20what%20could%20be%20more%20awe-inspiring,%20than%20to%20find%20that%20the%20structure%20of%20the%20physical%20world%20is%20intimately%20tied%20to%20the%20deep%20mathematical%20concepts,%20concepts%20which%20were%20developed%20out%20of%20considerations%20rooted%20only%20in%20logic%20and%20the%20beauty%20of%20form?&f=false)):

> $[$This$]$ was not just joy. There was something more, something deeper: After all, what could be more mysterious, what could be more awe-inspiring, than to find that the structure of the [[observable universe|physical world]] is intimately tied to the deep [[mathematics|mathematical]] concepts, concepts which were developed out of considerations rooted only in [[logic]] and the beauty of form?

\linebreak


## Related entries

* [[Yang-Mills theory]]

* [[Yang monopole]]

category: people
