pages/5/6/7/2/22765/content.md, before:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The idea of a symmetric cloaed midpoint algebra comes from [[Peter Freyd]]. 

## Definition

A __symmetric closed midpoint algebra__ is a [[symmetric cancellative midpoint algebra]] $(M,\vert, \odot, (-)^\bullet)$ with two elements $\bot:M$ and $\top:M$ such that $\bot^\bullet = \top$. 

## Properties

Every symmetric closed midpoint algebra with $\bot = \top$ is [[trivial object|trivial]]. 

## Examples

The [[unit interval]] with $a \vert b \coloneqq \frac{a + b}{2}$, $\odot = \frac{1}{2}$, $a^\bullet = 1 - a$, $\bot = 0$, and $\top = 1$ is an example of a symmetric closed midpoint algebra. 

## Related concepts

* [[closed midpoint algebra]]

* [[symmetric cancellative midpoint algebra]]

* [[minor scale]]

## References

* Insert proper reference to _Algebraic Real Analysis_ by [[Peter Freyd]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 164983 Update date: 2021-06-01 22:23:19+00:00 Page name: symmetric closed midpoint algebra

pages/5/6/7/2/22765/content.md, after:

+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The idea of a symmetric cloaed midpoint algebra comes from [[Peter Freyd]]. 

## Definition

A __symmetric closed midpoint algebra__ is a [[symmetric cancellative midpoint algebra]] $(M,\vert, \odot, (-)^\bullet)$ with two elements $\bot:M$ and $\top:M$ such that $\bot^\bullet = \top$. 

## Properties

Every symmetric closed midpoint algebra with $\bot = \top$ is [[trivial object|trivial]]. 

## Examples

The [[unit interval]] with $a \vert b \coloneqq \frac{a + b}{2}$, $\odot = \frac{1}{2}$, $a^\bullet = 1 - a$, $\bot = 0$, and $\top = 1$ is an example of a symmetric closed midpoint algebra. 

The set of truth values in Girard's [[linear logic]] is a symmetric closed midpoint algebra. 

## Related concepts

* [[closed midpoint algebra]]

* [[symmetric cancellative midpoint algebra]]

* [[minor scale]]

## References

* Insert proper reference to _Algebraic Real Analysis_ by [[Peter Freyd]]
