
<div class="rightHandSide toc">
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
</div>

#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

## Idea

The notion of [[2-site]] is the generalization of the notion of [[site]] to the [[higher category theory]] of [[2-categories]] ([[bicategories]]).

Over a 2-site one has a [[2-topos]] of [[2-sheaf|2-sheaves]].

## Definition

A **[[coverage]]** on a [[2-category]] $C$ consists of, for each object $U\in C$, a collection of families $(f_i: U_i\to U)_i$ of morphisms with codomain $U$, called _covering families_, such that

* If $(f_i:U_i\to U)_i$ is a covering family and $g:V\to U$ is a morphism, then there exists a covering family $(h_j:V_j\to V)_j$ such that each composite $g h_j$ factors through some $f_i$, up to isomorphism.

This is the 2-categorical analogue of the 1-categorical notion of [[nlab:coverage|coverage]] introduced in the [[nlab:Elephant|Elephant]].

A 2-category equipped with a coverage is called a **2-site**.


## Examples

* If $C$ is a [[michaelshulman:regular 2-category]], then the collection of all singleton families $(f:V\to U)$, where $f$ is eso, forms a coverage called the _regular coverage_.

* Likewise, if $C$ is a [[michaelshulman:coherent 2-category]], the collection of all finite jointly-eso families forms a coverage called the _coherent coverage_.

* On $Cat$, the _canonical coverage_ consists of all families that are jointly essentially surjective on objects.

## Saturation conditions

A **pre-Grothendieck coverage** on a 2-category is a coverage satisfying the following additional conditions:

* If $f:V\to U$ is an equivalence, then the one-element family $(f:V\to U)$ is a covering family.

* If $(f_i:U_i\to U)_{i\in I}$ is a covering family and for each $i$, so is $(h_{i j}:U_{i j} \to U_i)_{j\in J_i}$, then $(f_i h_{i j}:U_{i j}\to U)_{i\in I, j\in U_i}$ is also a covering family.

This is the 2-categorical version of a [[Grothendieck pretopology]].

Now, a **sieve** on an object $U\in C$ is defined to be a functor $R:C^{op}\to Cat$ with a transformation $R\to C(-,U)$ which is objectwise fully faithful (equivalently, it is ff in $[C^{op},Cat]$).  Every family $(f_i:U_i\to U)_i$ generates a sieve by defining $R(V)$ to be the full subcategory of $C(V,U)$ on those $g:V\to U$ such that $g \cong f_i h$ for some $i$ and some $h:V\to U_i$.  The following observation is due to [[StreetCBS]].

+--{: .num_lemma}
###### Lemma
A 2-presheaf $X:C^{op}\to Cat$ is a 2-sheaf for a covering family $(f_i:U_i\to U)_i$ if and only if
$$X(U) \simeq[C^{op},Cat](C(-,U),X) \to [C^{op},Cat](R,X)$$
is an equivalence, where $R$ is the sieve on $U$ generated by $(f_i:U_i\to U)_i$.
=--

Therefore, just as in the 1-categorical case, it is natural to restrict attention to covering _sieves_.  We define a **Grothendieck coverage** on a 2-category $C$ to consist of, for each object $U$, a collection of sieves on $U$ called covering sieves, such that

* If $R$ is a covering sieve on $U$ and $g:V\to U$ is any morphism, then $g^*(R)$ is a covering sieve on $V$.

* For each $U$ the sieve $M_U$ consisting of _all_ morphisms into $U$ (the sieve generated by the singleton family $(1_U)$) is a covering sieve.

* If $R$ is a covering sieve on $U$ and $S$ is an arbitrary sieve on $U$ such that for each $f:V\to U$ in $R$, $f^*(S)$  is a covering sieve on $V$, then $S$ is also a covering sieve on $U$.

Here if $R$ is a sieve on $U$ and $g:V\to U$ is a morphism, $g^*(R)$ denotes the sieve on $V$ consisting of all morphisms $h$ into $V$ such that $g h$ factors, up to isomorphism, through some morphism in $R$.

As in the 1-categorical case, one can then show that every coverage generates a unique Grothendieck coverage having the same 2-sheaves.




## References

The above involves content transferred from 

* [[Michael Shulman]], [[michaelshulamn:2-site]]

Strict 2-sites were considered in

* [[Ross Street]], _Two-dimensional sheaf theory_ J. Pure Appl. Algebra 23 (1982), no. 3, 251-270.

Bicategorical 2-sites in

* [[Ross Street]], _Characterizations of bicategories of stacks_ , Lecture Notes in Math., 962, 

[[!redirects 2-sites]]

[[!redirects bisite]]
[[!redirects bisites]]