pages/9/4/1/8/18149/content.md, before:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The concept of _nonassociative ring_ is like that of [[ring]] but without the requirement of [[associativity]]. 

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark on terminology

The term "nonassociative ring" may be regarded as an example of the "[[red herring principle]]", as a nonassociative ring is not in general a ring in the modern sense of the word.

=--

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A __nonassociative ring__ is a [[set]] $R$ with operations of addition and multiplication, such that:

*  $R$ is a [[unital magma]] under multiplication;
*  $R$ is an [[abelian group]] under addition;
*  multiplication distributes over addition.

=--

More sophisticatedly, just as a ring is a [[monoid object]] in [[Ab]], so

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A _nonassociative ring_ is a [[unital magma]] object in [[Ab]].

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

A non-associative ring may well have associativiy, i.e. it may be in the image of the [[forgetful functor]] from associative rings to nonassociative rings. But if so, then this element is still not part of the defining data and in particular a [[homomorphism]] of non-associative rings need not to preserve associativity.

=--

## Examples

Examples include [[Lie rings]] and [[nonassociative algebras]] such as [[alternative algebras]]. 

## Related concepts

* [[nonunital ring]]

* [[noncommutative ring]]

[[!redirects nonassociative rings]]

[[!redirects non-associative ring]]
[[!redirects non-associative rings]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 163302 Update date: 2021-05-03 15:21:20+00:00 Page name: nonassociative ring

pages/9/4/1/8/18149/content.md, after:


+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
###Context###
#### Algebra
+--{: .hide}
[[!include higher algebra - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

#Contents#
* table of contents
{:toc}

## Idea

The concept of _nonassociative ring_ is like that of [[ring]] but without the requirement of [[associativity]]. 

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark on terminology

The term "nonassociative ring" may be regarded as an example of the "[[red herring principle]]", as a nonassociative ring is not in general a ring in the modern sense of the word.

=--

## Definition

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A __nonassociative ring__ is a [[set]] $R$ with operations of addition and multiplication, such that:

*  $R$ is a [[unital magma]] under multiplication;
*  $R$ is an [[abelian group]] under addition;
*  multiplication distributes over addition.

=--

More sophisticatedly, just as a ring is a [[monoid object]] in [[Ab]], so

+-- {: .num_defn}
###### Definition

A _nonassociative ring_ is a [[unital magma]] object in [[Ab]].

=--

+-- {: .num_remark}
###### Remark

A non-associative ring may well have associativiy, i.e. it may be in the image of the [[forgetful functor]] from associative rings to nonassociative rings. But if so, then this element is still not part of the defining data and in particular a [[homomorphism]] of non-associative rings need not to preserve associativity.

=--

## Properties

For any nonassociative commutative ring $R$, a non-associative commutative ring extension (in the sense of [[field extension]]) of $R$ is just a $R$-[[nonassociative algebra]]. 

## Examples

Examples include [[Lie rings]] and [[nonassociative algebras]] such as [[alternative algebras]]. 

## Related concepts

* [[nonunital ring]]

* [[noncommutative ring]]

[[!redirects nonassociative rings]]

[[!redirects non-associative ring]]
[[!redirects non-associative rings]]
