pages/2/1/9/2/2912/content.md, before:


> not to be confused with [[Daniel Kahn]]

***

* [English wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Kan)


* [German Wikipedia entry](http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Marinus_Kan)



[[Clark Barwick]] has posted (on 7 August 2013) the following:

> On Sunday, 4 August, 2013, Daniel M. Kan died peacefully at his home in Newton, MA, surrounded by his family. It was his 86th birthday. There was a small burial service Monday afternoon.

> Dan received his Ph.D in 1955, and after short-term positions at Columbia, Princeton, and Hebrew University, he joined the Department of Mathematics at MIT in 1959, where he remained until his retirement in 1993. Dan continued to do mathematics until the last week of his life.

> In his long career, Dan published more than 70 papers with 15 coauthors. His lifelong mathematical pursuit was abstract [[homotopy theory]], and many of his ideas were so natural and flexible that they quickly became incorporated into the very fabric of [[algebraic topology]]. He supervised 15 Ph.D students (all of them at MIT), and he influenced many more through his unique seminar in algebraic topology, which today is known as the _Kan Seminar_.

## Selected writings

On [[homotopy commutative diagrams]]:

* [[William Dwyer]], [[Dan Kan]], [[Jeff Smith]], _Homotopy commutative diagrams and their realizations_, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 57 (1989) 5-24 (<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-4049(89)90023-6">doi:10.1016/0022-4049(89)90023-6</a>)


On [[homotopy limits]]:

* _[[Homotopy Limit Functors on Model Categories and Homotopical Categories]]_

* [[Homotopy Limits, Completions and Localizations]]

## Related $n$Lab entries 

* [[homotopy theory]]

* [[Kan extension]]

* [[Kan lift]]

* [[Dold-Kan correspondence]]

* [[Kan fibration]]

* [[Kan complex]]

* [[relative category]]

category: people

[[!redirects Dan Kan]]
[[!redirects D. M. Kan]]
[[!redirects Kan]]
[[!redirects Daniel M. Kan]]

Commit message:

Revision ID: 161174 Update date: 2021-03-12 19:09:07+00:00 Page name: Daniel Kan

pages/2/1/9/2/2912/content.md, after:


> not to be confused with [[Daniel Kahn]]

***

* [English wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Kan)


* [German Wikipedia entry](http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Marinus_Kan)



[[Clark Barwick]] has posted (on 7 August 2013) the following:

> On Sunday, 4 August, 2013, Daniel M. Kan died peacefully at his home in Newton, MA, surrounded by his family. It was his 86th birthday. There was a small burial service Monday afternoon.

> Dan received his Ph.D in 1955, and after short-term positions at Columbia, Princeton, and Hebrew University, he joined the Department of Mathematics at MIT in 1959, where he remained until his retirement in 1993. Dan continued to do mathematics until the last week of his life.

> In his long career, Dan published more than 70 papers with 15 coauthors. His lifelong mathematical pursuit was abstract [[homotopy theory]], and many of his ideas were so natural and flexible that they quickly became incorporated into the very fabric of [[algebraic topology]]. He supervised 15 Ph.D students (all of them at MIT), and he influenced many more through his unique seminar in algebraic topology, which today is known as the _Kan Seminar_.

## Selected writings

On (enhancement and generalization of) [[Elmendorf's theorem]] in [[equivariant homotopy theory]]:

* {#DwyerKan84} [[William Dwyer]], [[Daniel Kan]], _Singular functors and realization functors_, Indagationes Mathematicae (Proceedings) Volume 87, Issue 2, 1984, Pages 147-153 (<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/1385-7258(84)90016-7">doi:10.1016/1385-7258(84)90016-7</a>)


On [[homotopy commutative diagrams]]:

* [[William Dwyer]], [[Dan Kan]], [[Jeff Smith]], _Homotopy commutative diagrams and their realizations_, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 57 (1989) 5-24 (<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-4049(89)90023-6">doi:10.1016/0022-4049(89)90023-6</a>)


On [[homotopy limits]]:

* _[[Homotopy Limit Functors on Model Categories and Homotopical Categories]]_

* [[Homotopy Limits, Completions and Localizations]]

## Related $n$Lab entries 

* [[homotopy theory]]

* [[Kan extension]]

* [[Kan lift]]

* [[Dold-Kan correspondence]]

* [[Kan fibration]]

* [[Kan complex]]

* [[relative category]]

category: people

[[!redirects Dan Kan]]
[[!redirects D. M. Kan]]
[[!redirects Kan]]
[[!redirects Daniel M. Kan]]
