#Contents#
* automatic table of contents goes here
{:toc}

#Definition#

An **epimorphism** in a [[category]] $C$ is a [[morphism]] 
$f : X \to Y$ 
such that every contravariant [[hom-functor]] $Hom(-,Z)$ sends it to an [[injection]]
$$
  \forall Z \in C : \;
  Hom(Y,Z) \stackrel{f^*}{\hookrightarrow} 
  Hom(X,Z)
  \,.
$$

In more elementary terms, $f: X \to Y$ is an epimorphism if, given any $g, h: Y \to Z$, $g = h$ if $f; g = f; h$:
$$\array{
  &              & Y \\
  & \nearrow_{f} &   & \searrow^{g} \\
X &              &   &              & Z \\
  & \searrow^{f} &   & \nearrow_{h} \\
  &              & Y \\
} \quad\quad \Rightarrow \quad\quad \array{
X & \rightarrow^{f} & Y & \rightrightarrows^g_h & Z \\
}$$

+--{.query}
Can anybody make this look nicer? Preferably with curved arrows in the right-hand diagram? And maybe even with little vertical equals signs to show how the diagrams commute? I can do it in XYpic, but that\'s not supported by iTeX.
=--

An epimorphism in $C^{op}$ is a [[monomorphism]] in $C$.

The epimorphisms in [[Set]] are the [[surjection|surjective]] functions; thus epimorphisms can be thought of as a categorical notion of surjection.  However, this is frequently not quite right: in categories of sets with [[stuff, structure, property|extra structure]], epimorphisms need not be surjective (unlike the case for [[monomorphism]]s, which are usually injective).  Often, though, the surjections correspond to a stronger notion of epimorphism.


# Variations #

There are a sequence of variations on the concept of epimorphism, from strongest to weakest:


[[split epimorphism]] $\Rightarrow$
[[regular epimorphism]] $\Rightarrow$ 
[[strict epimorphism]]$\Rightarrow$
[[strong epimorphism]]$\Rightarrow$ 
[[extremal epimorphism]]$\Rightarrow$
epimorphism.

In [[Set|the category of sets]], every epimorphism is regular (and even split if you believe the [[axiom of choice]]), so it can be hard to know, when generalising concepts from $\Set$ to other categories, what kind of epimorphism to use.

In general, the two serious distinctions come

* Between split epimorphisms and regular ones: in very few categories are all regular epimorphisms split.  Splitting of even regular epimorphisms is a form of the axiom of choice, which may be valid  in [[Set]] (if you believe it) but very often fails [[internalization|internally]].

* Between extremal epimorphisms and "plain" epimorphisms: in many categories, the plain epimorphisms are oddly behaved, but the extremal ones are what we would expect.  For instance, the inclusion $\mathbb{Z}\hookrightarrow\mathbb{Q}$ is an epimorphism of [[ring]]s, but the extremal epimorphisms of rings are just the surjective ring homomorphisms.

The remaining distinctions frequently collapse.  For instance:

* In a category with [[pullback]]s, any strict epimorphism is regular, and any extremal epimorphism is strong.

* In a [[regular category]], every extremal epimorphism is regular, so the sequence reduces to three: split, regular = strict = strong = extremal, plain.  In [[algebraic category|algebraic categories]] (categories of algebra for a [[Lawvere theory]]), which are regular, the regular/strict/strong/extremal epimorphisms are the morphisms whose underlying function is surjective.

* In a [[pretopos]] (hence also in a [[topos]]), every epimorphism is regular, so the only distinction remaining is split versus non-split.

Moreover, even in non-regular categories, there seems to be a strong tendency for strong/extremal epimorphisms to coincide with regular/strict ones.  For example, this is the case in [[Top]].  However, the distinction is real; for instance, in the category generated by the following graph:
$$
\array{ &&&& C\\
  &&& ^f\nearrow\\
  A& \underoverset{h}{k}{\rightrightarrows} & B \\
  &&& _g\searrow\\
  &&&& D}
$$
subject to the equations $f h = f k$ and $g h = g k$, both $f$ and $g$ are strong, but not strict, epimorphisms.


[[!redirects epimorphisms]]