
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context
#### $(\infty,1)$-Category theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include quasi-category theory contents]]
=--
#### $(\infty,1)$-Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include (infinity,1)-topos - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

# The $(\infty,1)$-comparison lemma
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

The **(∞,1)-comparison lemma** says that, under certain conditions, a functor between  [[(∞,1)-sites]] induces an equivalence between the categories of [[(∞,1)-sheaves]] on the sites.


In [this paper](#Hoyois2013), Lemma C.3, Hoyois proves the following comparison lemma.

+-- {: .num_theorem #Hoyois2013}
###### Lemma

Let $D$ be a [[locally small]] [[(∞,1)-category]], $C$ a [[small]] (∞,1)-category, and $u : C \to D$ a fully faithful functor. Let $\tau$ and $\rho$ be quasi-topologies on $C$ and $D$, respectively. Suppose that:

a. Every $\tau$-[[sieve]] is generated by a cover $\{U_i \to X\}$ such that:

  1. the fiber products $U_{i_0} \times_X \cdots\times_X U_{i_n}$ exist and are preserved by $u$;

  2. $\{u(U_i) \to u(X)\}$ is a $\bar\rho$-cover.

b. For every $X \in C$ and every $\rho$-sieve $R \hookrightarrow u(X)$, $u^*(R) \hookrightarrow X$ is a $\bar\tau$-sieve in $C$.

c. Every $X \in D$ admits a $\bar\rho$-cover $\{U_i \to X\}$ such that the fiber products $U_{i_0} \times_X \cdots \times_X U_{i_n}$ exist and belong to the essential image of $u$.

Then the adjunction $u^* \dashv u_*$ restricts to an equivalence of ∞-categories $Shv_\rho(D) \simeq Shv_\tau(C)$.
=--
Here, a _quasi-topology_ is a collection of sieves closed under pullback and $\bar\tau$ is the coarsest topology containing a quasi-topology $\tau$. The stability under pullback ensures that $Shv_\tau(C)=Shv_{\bar\tau}(C)$.

## Generalization

It seems difficult to find a useful generalization not assuming the existence of some pullbacks. For the conclusion of the [lemma](#Hoyois2013), the following conditions (b is unchanged) are both necessary and sufficient:

a. For every $\tau$-sieve $U \hookrightarrow X$, $a_\rho u_!(U \to X)$ is an equivalence.

b. For every $X \in C$ and every $\rho$-sieve $R \hookrightarrow u(X)$, $u^*(R) \hookrightarrow X$ is a $\bar\tau$-sieve in $C$.

c. For every $X \in D$, its image in $Shv_\rho(D)$ belongs to the smallest subcategory generated by the image of $C$ under colimits.

We can take these conditions a and b to define, respectively, the notions of [[cover-preserving functor]] (continuous functor) and [[comorphism of sites]] (cocontinuous functor) for (∞,1)-sites.

## Related concepts

* [[comparison lemma]]

## References

* [[Marc Hoyois]], _A quadratic refinement of the Grothendieck-Lefschetz-Verdier trace formula_. [arXiv:1309.6147](https://arxiv.org/abs/1309.6147)
  {#Hoyois2013}