A **coherent category** is a [[regular category]] in which the [[subobject]] [[partial order|posets]] $Sub(X)$ all have finite unions which are preserved by the [[base change]] functors $f^*:Sub(Y)\to Sub(X)$.

A coherent category has an [[internal logic]] which is [[coherent logic]].


## Extensivity

Any coherent category automatically has a strict [[initial object]].  Moreover, if an object $X$ is the [[union]] of two subobjects $A\hookrightarrow X$ and $B\hookrightarrow X$ such that $A\cap B = 0$, then $X = A\amalg B$ is their [[coproduct]].  Thus, if every pair of objects can be embedded [[disjoint coproduct|disjointly]] in some third object, then a coherent category has disjoint finite coproducts and is [[extensive category|extensive]] (or "positive").

Extensivity is the analogue for coherent categories of [[exact category|exactness]] for regular categories.  A coherent category which is both extensive and exact is called a [[pretopos]].


## Infinitary versions ##

An **infinitary coherent category** is a [[well-powered category|well-powered]] [[regular category]] in which the subobject posets $Sub(X)$ have all _small_ unions which are [[pullback stability|stable under pullback]].  Infinitary coherent categories are also called __geometric categories__.

+--{: .query}
[[Mike Shulman]]: I'm starting to feel that well-poweredness shouldn't be included here.  Any thoughts?
=--

See [[familial regularity and exactness]] for a general description of the spectrum from regular categories through finitary and infinitary coherent categories.


## The coherent topology

Any coherent category $C$ admits a subcanonical [[Grothendieck topology]] in which the covering families are generated by finite, jointly regular-epimorphic families.  Equivalently, they are generated by single [[regular epimorphisms]] and by finite unions of subobjects.  If $C$ is extensive, then its coherent topology is generated by the regular topology together with the extensive topology.  (In fact, the coherent topology is [[superextensive site|superextensive]].)  If $C$ is a pretopos, then its self-indexing is a [[stack]] for its coherent topology.

Topoi of sheaves for coherent topologies on coherent categories are called [[coherent topos|coherent topoi]].  (The terminology is slightly confusing, though, because every topos is a coherent category.)


## Making categories coherent

Just like the [[reg/lex completion]], there is a "coh/lex completion" which makes an arbitrary [[finitely complete category]] into a coherent one in a universal way.


[[!redirects coherent categories]]
[[!redirects coherent topology]]
[[!redirects coherent coverage]]
[[!redirects geometric category]]