In the [[foundations]] of mathematics, it\'s interesting to consider the axiom that the [[Set|category of sets]] has [[projective object|enough projectives]]; in short: COSHEP (pronounced /ko:-shep/). This is a weak form of the [[axiom of choice]].

In elementary terms, this states that for every set $A$, for some set $P$, there is a [[surjection]] $P \to A$, and every surjection $X \to P$ has a [[section]]. (Note that the axiom of choice states that every surjection $X \to A$ has a section; that is, you may take $P$ to be $A$ itself.) In analogy with algebra (see below), we may call $P$ (or more precisely, the surjection $P \to A$) a _projective resolution_ of $A$. Or borrowing from the philosophy of constructivism, we may call $P$ (or again, $P \to A$) a _complete presentation_ of $A$.


# Consequences

As an axiom, this has important consequences for algebra; there, one often uses the axiom of choice to prove that categories of modules have enough projectives, on the grounds that the [[free functor|free]] modules are projective. But COSHEP is sufficient; while not every free module will be projective, one can still use COSHEP to find a [[projective resolution]] for every free module (and thus for every module).

Another important consequence is the axiom of [[dependent choice]], and thus also of [[countable choice]]. To prove dependent choice (over a set $A$) from COSHEP, take the usual diagram for the universal property of a [[natural numbers object]] and interpret the arrows as [[entire relation]]s rather than functions. Take a projective resolution $P \to A$, note that a surjective function is the reverse of an entire relation, and replace entire relations out of the projective sets $1$ and $P$ with functions. This gives us (by [[recursion]]) the required function $N \to P \to X$.


# Justification

Although perhaps not well known in the literature of [[constructive mathematics]], this axiom may be justified by the sort of reasoning usually accepted (except in the school of Fred Richman) to justify the axioms of countable choice and dependent choice (which it implies, as above). To be explicit, every set $A$ should have a 'completely presented' set of 'canonical' elements, that is elements given directly as they are constructed without regard for the [[equality relation]] imposed upon them. For canonical elements, equality is identity, so the BHK interpretation of logic justifies the axiom of choice for a completely presented set. This set is $P$, and $A$ is obtained from it as a [[quotient set|quotient]] by the relation of equality on $A$. This argument can be made precise in many forms of [[type theory]] (including those of Martin-L&#246;f and Thierry Coquand), which thus justify COSHEP, much as they are widely known to justify dependent choice.


# In topos theory #

When working in the [[internal logic]] of a [[topos]], the "internal" meaning of COSHEP is "every object is covered by an [[internally projective object]]."  (Compare with the internal axiom of choice: every object is internally projective.)  Since every projective object is internally projective, if the topos itself has enough projectives, then it must satisfy internal COSHEP.

For example, any [[presheaf]] topos has enough projectives, since any coproduct of representables is projective, and therefore it validates internal COSHEP.  In contrast, any topos that violates countable choice, of which there are plenty, must also violate internal COSHEP.

An interesting example of a topos that has enough projectives and thus does satisfy internal COSHEP (at least, assuming the axiom of choice in [[Set]]), although it violates the full (internal) axiom of choice, is the [[effective topos]].  The reason for this is quite similar to the intuitive justification for COSHEP given above.


# Remarks #

* The dual axiom that $Set$ has enough [[injective object|injectives]] (that is, every set admits an injection into an injective set) is always true.  In fact, any topos has enough injectives: every power object is injective and every object $X$ embeds in its power object $P X$ via the "singleton" map $\{\cdot\}:X\hookrightarrow P X$.

* Since $Set$ is (essentially regardless of foundations) an [[exact category]], if it has enough projectives then it must be the _free_ exact category $PSet_{ex/lex}$ generated by its subcategory $PSet$ of projective objects.  By the construction of $PSet_{ex/lex}$, it follows that every set is the quotient of some "pseudo-equivalence relation" in $PSet$; i.e., the result of imposing an equality relation on some completely presented set.  See [[SEAR+ε]] for an application of this idea.


# References

When [[Peter Aczel]] was developing $\mathbf{CZF}$ (a constructive predicative version of [[ZFC]]), he considered this axiom, under the name of the _presentation axiom_, but ultimately rejected in favour of its weaker consequence, [[dependent choice]].

* Peter Aczel. _The type theoretic interpretation of constructive set theory_. Logic Colloquium '77 (Proc. Conf., Wroclaw, 1977), pp. 55--66, Stud. Logic Foundations Math., 96, North-Holland, Amsterdam-New York, 1978.  Cited in Palmgren, below.

The presentation axiom was, however, adopted by [[Erik Palmgren]] in $\mathbf{CETCS}$ (a constructive predicative version of [[ETCS]]):

*  Erik Palmgren.  _Constructivist and Structuralist Foundations: Bishop's and Lawvere's Theories of Sets_.  [pdf](http://www.math.uu.se/~palmgren/cetcs.pdf).


[[!redirects presentation axiom]]

category: foundational axiom
