
+-- {: .rightHandSide}
+-- {: .toc .clickDown tabindex="0"}
### Context###
#### Topos Theory
+-- {: .hide}
[[!include topos theory - contents]]
=--
=--
=--

> This page is about a general theorem in [[topos theory]]. For other meanings see e.g. [[comparison theorem (étale cohomology)]].


# The comparison lemma
* table of contents
{: toc}

## Idea

A [[functor]] from a [[category]] to a [[site]] induces a [[Grothendieck topology|topology]] on the source category.  The **comparison lemma** says that, under certain conditions, such a functor induces an [[equivalence of categories|equivalence]] between the [[category of sheaves|categories of sheaves]] on the sites.


## Statement

\begin{definition}
\label{InducedTopology}
Let $u \colon B \to C$ be a functor with $C$ a [[site]]. The **induced topology** on $B$ by $u$ is the finest one such that $u$ is a [[continuous functor]], i.e. such that the map $G \mapsto G \circ u$ takes [[sheaves]] on $C$ to sheaves on $B$.
\end{definition}

The classical comparison lemma ([Verdier 1972](#Verdier72)):

+-- {: .num_theorem #SGA4}
###### Theorem

Let $B$ be a [[small category]], $C$ a [[site]], and $u : B \to C$ a [[fully faithful]] functor.  Consider $B$ as a [[site]] with the topology induced by $u$ (Def. \ref{InducedTopology}).
  If every object $x \in C$ has a covering $(u(a_\alpha) \to x)$ by objects of $B$, then $u \colon B \to C$ induces an [[equivalence]] of [[category of sheaves|categories of sheaves]] (of sets) $B^\sim \to C^\sim$.

=--


[Beilinson 2012](#Beilinson2011) proves the following generalisation of the classical comparison lemma:

+-- {: .num_theorem #Beilinson}
###### Theorem

Let $B$ be an [[essentially small category]] and $C$ be an essentially small [[site]].  Suppose that $u \colon B \to C$ is a faithful functor which exhibits $B$ (with the induced topology) as a [[dense subsite]] of $C$, i.e. which satisfies the following condition:

* For every object $x \in C$ and finite [[family]] $(x \to u(a_\alpha))_\alpha$, with $a_\alpha \in B$, there exists a [[covering family]] $(u(b_\beta) \to x)_\beta$ of $x$ such that every composite $u(b_\beta) \to x \to u(a_\alpha)$ lies in the image of $\Hom(b_\beta, a_\alpha) \hookrightarrow \Hom\big(u(b_\beta), u(a_\alpha)\big)$.

Then:

1. The topology on $B$ induced by $u$ has the following simple description: a [[sieve]] $(x_\gamma \to x)_\gamma$ is [[covering sieve|covering]] iff the sieve generated by the family $(u(x_\gamma) \to u(x))_\gamma$ is covering in $C$.

1. The functor $u \colon B \to C$ induces an [[equivalence]] of [[categories of sheaves]] (of sets) $Sh(B) \to Sh(C)$.

=--

## Related concepts

* [[(∞,1)-comparison lemma]]

* [[dense subsite]]

* "[[comparison functor]]" is mostly understood to refer to a different concept in [[categorical algebra]]

## References

* {#Verdier72} [[Jean-Louis Verdier]], _Fonctorialit&#233; de cat&#233;gories de faisceaux_, in: _Th&#233;orie des topos et cohomologie &#233;tale de sch&#233;mas_ ([[SGA4]]), Tome 1, Lect. Notes in Math. **269**, Springer (1972) 265-298.

* [[Anders Kock]], [[Ieke Moerdijk]], Section 2 of: _Presentations of étendues_. [[Cahiers|Cahiers Topologie Géom. Différentielle Catég.]] **32** 2 (1991) 145–164 &lbrack;[EuDML](https://eudml.org/doc/91476)&rbrack;

* [[Peter Johnstone]], Section C2.2 of: _[[Sketches of an Elephant]]_, Oxford University Press (2002)

* {#Beilinson2011} [[Alexander Beilinson]], _$p$-adic periods and derived de Rham cohomology_, J. Amer. Math. Soc. **25** (2012) 715-738  &lbrack;[arXiv:1102.1294](http://arxiv.org/abs/1102.1294), [doi:10.1090/S0894-0347-2012-00729-2](https://doi.org/10.1090/S0894-0347-2012-00729-2), [pdf](https://www.ams.org/journals/jams/2012-25-03/S0894-0347-2012-00729-2/S0894-0347-2012-00729-2.pdf)&rbrack;
  



[[!redirects Comparison lemma]]
[[!redirects comparison lemma]]
[[!redirects the comparison lemma]]
